



One of the organizations that has consistently provided detailed data on attacks on education is INSEC of Nepal, which has a national system for collecting information on human rights violations. INSEC has been working for the protection and promotion of human rights for nearly two decades and has been publishing a Nepal Human Rights Yearbook since 1992. But it only began monitoring attacks on schools, teachers and students in 2005, following the issuance of UN Security Council Resolution 1612 on children and armed conflict, which listed “attacks on schools and hospitals” as one of six grave violations against children and established a Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism that initially covered seven conflicts, including the Maoist rebellion in Nepal.64INSEC has a representative in each of 75 districts nationwide. They work with partner organizations locally, such as women’s groups, police or village development committees, to gather and verify information. If an incident is serious they will visit the scene and interview victims or witnesses. For very grave incidents, a team from one of five regional offices or the central office might go with them and make the report public.65 For reporting to be used as part of the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism on Children and Armed Conflict (MRM), district representatives always go to the location of incidents and interview victims, their families and witnesses.The district representatives’ information is sent to one of five regional offices, where it is verified and cross-checked with other information. It is then passed on to a central office, where it is verified again and entered into a database. Analysis of the information is published in monthly and annual reports and is available on INSEC’s website.66The only international system for monitoring attacks on education is the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism on Children and Armed Conflict established by Security Council Resolution 1612 and implemented by the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict. The MRM demands the highest standards of verification, including interviews of victims and witnesses. But while it makes a vital contribution, its findings are limited to specific reporting periods of a number of months rather than being year round. In addition, its main focus so far has been on the recruitment of child soldiers and it is restricted to examining violations affecting children. It has also suffered from the same problems that can undermine any system of monitoring: that in some conflict situations, such as the war in Sri Lanka, high levels of insecurity have been a key factor in limiting the participation 

64 The other countries covered in the piloting of the mechanism were Burundi, Côte D’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, Sri Lanka and Sudan.65 Prekshya Ojha, telephone interview with the author, August 13, 2009.66 INSEC website, www.inseconline.org. 

