



2. The scale of attacksParts of the world are becoming deadly places in which to be a student, teacher or education ofﬁ cial. Attacks on education often escape international attention amid the general ﬁ ghting in conﬂ ict-affected countries. But the number of reported assassinations, bombings and burnings of school and academic staff and buildings has risen dramatically in the past three years, reﬂ ecting the increasingly bloody nature of local conﬂ icts around the world. Accurate global ﬁ gures do not exist for the number of teachers, students or ofﬁ cials killed each year, or for other types of attacks such as abductions, torture and threats of violence, nor are there accurate global ﬁ gures for the number of attacks on schools, universities and education ofﬁ ces. But there are speciﬁ c ﬁ gures for the number of incidents in particular countries and territories, and they suggest that the worst-affected in the past ﬁ ve years include Afghanistan, Colombia, Iraq, Nepal, the Palestinian Autonomous Territories, Thailand and Zimbabwe, and in all cases except Nepal the conﬂ ict is ongoing. The pattern of unreported incidents might tell a different story, however, and it appears impossible to make comparisons with incident rates in previous decades, or in other sectors, due to lack of available data. It may be that attacks on education rise and fall according to the extent of wider conﬂ ict. Nevertheless, in 2006 the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conﬂ ict warned the United Nations that schools, places that should be safe havens for children, have “increasingly become the prime target of attacks by armed parties”.1 Moreover, in a number of countries the bombing of universities and education ofﬁ ces and targeted killing of teachers and academics have become the favoured tactics of ﬁ ghting groups. Reported incidents in some of the worst-affected countries are presented below.

1 Report of the Special Representative of the Secretary General for Children and Armed Conﬂ ict, 17 August 2006 (A/61/275).

