



There has been a failure to encourage the involvement of key education sector actors (both UN and civil society) and get them to address and highlight issues relating to attacks on education. It would appear that education organizations have yet to become closely and/or consistently involved with the monitoring and reporting mechanism and in some cases, may not even be aware of its existence. As yet, no community of practice on reporting on these violations has emerged. As a result of their absence or lack of engagement, education-oriented organizations are not feeding information into the Country Teams for the Secretary-General’s reports or proposing actions they would like the Security Council to take to protect children and education.Where MRM reporting on education attacks does occur, it is limited to an exclusive emphasis on physical attacks while other threats and the impact on children and education systems are conspicuously lacking in such reporting.It should be noted that two general factors affect any attempt to bring education organizations on board. One is lack of staff and funding. Most Task Force members have added MRM activities to their workload with little or no expansion of capacity. Even UNICEF has received very little funding for implementing the MRM. As Barnett and Jefferys argue, there is a need to ensure that Task Forces routinely receive resources both to facilitate capacity-building for their members in monitoring and reporting and to ensure that monitoring and reporting are undertaken to a sufficient scale and quality.283 Another factor is the reluctance to cooperate in collecting information about human rights violations due to fear of threats or retributive attacks by armed forces and armed groups. NGOs may also have concerns about risking principles of partiality and neutrality, as Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict has reported, because the information collected is used to trigger political action by the Security Council.284 Many NGOs are concerned about the possibility that information gathered by MRM Task Forces might be shared with the International Criminal Court, particularly in countries where the ICC has issued indictments for war crimes, due to fears that commanders and others facing potential indictment will carry out punitive attacks.285Greater involvement of education-oriented UN agencies and NGOs is needed to put attacks on education on the agenda of country-level MRM Task Forces. But these organizations are caught in a quandary: if they could become more active in monitoring and reporting education attacks, they could lobby effectively for more financial support for preventive recovery programmes, but without extra funds and training they may not have the capacity to monitor such attacks. There is a case, 

283 Barnett and Jefferys, Full of Promise, 15, 20.284 Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict, Getting it Done and Doing it Right, 11.285 Ibid., 17.

