
Afghanistan : Pupils at the Lycee Mahmud Tarzi, Kandahar in 2007.© UNESCO/Roya Aziz/Star Group




bombs or burnings and also because staff or pupils were too afraid to attend. The climate of fear this creates can affect many schools in the surrounding area, which also close, to avoid meeting a similar fate. Even if they stay open, parents may decide it is too risky to send their child to school.“Schools are being shut down by bombs and threats, denying another generation of Afghan girls an education and the chance for a better life,” said Zama Coursen-Neff. In August 2006, UNICEF warned that schools in Afghanistan were becoming the targets of increasingly serious attacks and reported that incidents had spread from the south and south-eastern region to all parts of the country.55 Human Rights Watch found entire districts in Afghanistan where attacks had closed all schools and had driven out the teachers and non-governmental organizations providing education. Despite advances in recent years, the majority of girls in the country remained out of school. Nearly one-third of the districts had no girls’ schools.Thailand: Targets of separatists In December 2006, two distraught teachers were found embracing the charred remains of two of their colleagues who were shot dead by suspected Muslim separatists at Ban Bado, their elementary school. Their bodies had been set alight on a paved road 100 metres from the school. Chamnong Chupatpong, the Director, and Manoe Sonkawe, one of the teachers, were driving a pickup truck when four suspected militants on motorbikes drove up and shot them at close range. The attackers dragged their bodies along the road, soaked them with petrol and set them on ﬁ re. Spikes had been placed across the road leading to the bodies to slow down any soldiers and police ofﬁ cers chasing after the attackers.56Human Rights Watch said that the two teachers were victims of a wave of separatist violence that erupted in Thailand’s three most southerly provinces in January 2004 and has claimed 2,000 lives. 

55 UNICEF Kabul/Geneva, 7 August 2006, Media release: ‘UNICEF Alarmed as Attacks on Afghan Schools Rise’.56 The Nation, 29 December 2006, ‘Suspected Militants Kill and Burn Two Teachers in Yala’.

