



and the ILO, also laid down some important markers on the conditions in which education staff should be required to operate.The ILO, which sends fact-ﬁ nding missions to countries and publishes reports that are sometimes strongly critical of government practice, has a long track record of dealing openly with violations. By contrast, UNESCO prefers to use quiet diplomacy. Two further developments have the potential to put additional muscle behind human rights instruments both on a general level and in regard to attacks on children and education. The ﬁ rst was the appointment of a Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conﬂ ict in 1997 in response to Graca Machel’s report for the Secretary-General, Impact of Armed Conﬂ ict on Children. The second was the establishment of the International Criminal Court in 2002, which deals with crimes against humanity, war crimes and genocide. Under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court the Special Representative proposed three child-speciﬁ c provisions, which have been classiﬁ ed as war crimes: the conscription, enlistment or use in hostilities of children younger than 15 years; intentional attacks on hospitals and schools; and grave acts of sexual violence. In addition, the forcible transfer of children of a group targeted for intentional destruction constitutes genocide under the Rome Statute. Three investigations are currently ongoing in relation to situations in Darfur, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda. Attacks on educational institutions are part of the investigations in relation to the ﬁ rst two situations. The International Criminal Court’s ﬁ rst trial, which began in January 2007, includes six charges of child conscription in the Democratic Republic of the Congo against Thomas Lubunga. In ﬁ ve warrants issued against leaders of the Lord’s Resistance Army (one of whom has since been killed) charges involve attacks against children in Uganda. Under ILO convention 182, the Special Representative advocated that the enlistment of children as soldiers be classiﬁ ed as one of the worst forms of child labour. The Convention also prohibits the forced or compulsory recruitment of children under the age of 18 for use in armed conﬂ icts. One of the areas where there has been most progress is in the campaign to disband, demobilize and reintegrate child soldiers. It was heavily backed by the UN Security Council and the Ofﬁ ce of the Special Representative. In February 2005, the Secretary-General proposed a compliance regime involving naming offending parties, action plans to end violations, establishment of a monitoring and reporting mechanism, and concrete action from the General Assembly and 

