
Advocacy
Reporting and advocacy by international human rights organizations, NGOs and UN agencies have increased awareness of
attacks and encouraged improved response and prevention.
Data from monitoring have been used to press military forces
to vacate schools that they have been using for military
purposes in Afghanistan, DRC and South Sudan, for example,
and to seek funds for repairing and resupplying damaged
schools. In some countries, such as India, organizations have
tried to persuade governments to stop using schools as voting
stations or teachers as polling officers during political
elections, which can heighten their vulnerability to attack.
Human rights organizations and trade union movements have
advocated internationally for the release of arbitrarily
detained, tortured or imprisoned students and academics in
countries such as Colombia, Iran, Sudan and Turkey.

EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

Key recommendations
Attacking schools, universities, students, teachers and academics is a common tactic in situations of conflict
and insecurity around the world. While some progress has been made, much more can and should be done to
protect education:
• States should investigate, prosecute and, if guilt is proven, punish individuals responsible for ordering,
bearing command responsibility for, or taking part in, the range of violations of international law that
constitute attacks on education. Regional and international tribunals should, similarly, give specific
consideration to the range of violations that constitute attacks against education.
• Governments, the United Nations, regional peacekeepers and armed non-state groups should refrain from
using schools and universities for military purposes; they should endorse the Lucens Guidelines for
Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict and incorporate them into
their doctrine and policies.
• Government leaders and leaders of armed non-state groups should make clear public statements that
attacks on education are prohibited and issue clear military orders to this effect. States should also ensure
that their domestic law criminalizes all elements of attacks on education in line with international humanitarian and human rights law.
• Governments of states where attacks occur should rigorously monitor and investigate attacks against
students, teachers, academics and other education personnel, and schools and universities, as well as the
impact of such attacks, and use that information to coordinate responses. At the international level, the
human rights treaty monitoring bodies should more systematically raise the issue of attacks on education
and military use of schools in their examination of states, and governments and civil society should
provide more information about these violations in their submissions.
• Where safety concerns allow, UN agencies, NGOs, peace-keeping forces and governments should
undertake or support negotiations with parties to a conflict in order to reach agreement regarding respect
for schools as safe sanctuaries and re-opening closed schools.
• Governments should ensure education facilities, staff and students are not used for electoral tasks and
political events whenever it can be reasonably expected that such use would heighten the risk of attack.
• education ministries should adopt conflict-sensitive curricula and resourcing policies to ensure that
education does not help trigger conflict and become a target for attack.
• States should protect higher education institutions at all times and prevent violence and intimidation
against academics by introducing and implementing policies, regulations and laws that promote both
institutional autonomy and the security of higher education communities.

