
Security forces line their weapons against the school wall at Dwarika Middle School, India, on June 7, 2009.




were intended as an attack on education or on civilians in general; in this case, they are presumed to constitute an attack on the university because they appear to be intended to kill large numbers of people in a place where students are likely to gather. The study does not cover the killing of the spouses, children or parents of education victims unless there is clear evidence that they are being targeted as a means of threatening a student, teacher, academic or other education personnel.The seizure of children for recruitment as child soldiers while attending school or school activities, or on their way to or from school, is a direct attack on education. It is precisely because children can be found together in large numbers at school that many abductions for the purpose of recruitment take place during attacks on schools or while students are travelling to or from school. From the perspective that all children have the right to education, the abduction or recruitment and use of children by armed groups or armed forces from homes or any location, where it deprives them of, or disrupts, their access to education, is also an attack on education.The study includes the use of educational activities or facilities to encourage voluntary child soldier enlistment. Schools can easily be converted into military training grounds and in some situations curricula have been manipulated or political re-education programmes have been imposed to encourage such enlistment.The inclusion of sexual violence refers to acts carried out by armed groups or security forces against students or education personnel either at or on the way to or from, or as a result of abduction from, the education institution or during educational activities. In the case of teachers or academics, assassinations at home are also included in situations where there is an official order, published threat or pattern of tracking down and killing such personnel outside of the place of work. In such circumstances, it is reasonable to assume these events are not random killings of civilians. For instance, in Afghanistan many threats issued to teachers are placed by the doors of their homes. The occupation of school and university buildings by armed groups or security forces, or their use as a military base, constitutes an attack on education 

Koindu's primary school was completely destroyed during Sierra Leone's 11-year civil war. Rebel soldiers used it as a base and training ground - and they used its books and wooden furnishings as fuel for fires. Virtually nothing was left after the war but shells of roofless buildings.© USAID/L. Lartigue

