
SUMMARY

Profiled countries with attacks on higher education facilities,
students and staff, 2009-2012

Russia

Israel/Palestine
Libya

Côte d’Ivoire
Nigeria
Colombia

Democratic
Republic of
the Congo

Afghanistan
Pakistan
Myanmar

Iraq
Egypt

Mexico

Iran

Turkey
Syria

Sudan

Thailand
Bahrain
Yemen

Ethiopia
Somalia
Kenya
South Sudan

India

Indonesia

Zimbabwe

Students’ convoy targeted
In May 2010, at least 100 students were injured when a convoy of buses
was attacked, according to the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). The buses were transporting college students from Christian
towns and villages on the Nineveh Plain back to classes at the University of
Mosul and were being escorted by Iraqi forces. A car bomb exploded as the
first buses crossed a checkpoint along the internal border between the
semi-autonomous Kurdish region and the rest of the country. Shortly
afterwards, another roadside bomb went off, according to the New York
Times. The area around Mosul University had already experienced several
attacks and threats of attacks in 2009, which is why students travelled in
these types of convoys. The attacks on Christian students were part of a
spate of dozens of attacks against Christians in Iraq in 2010. According to
Worldwatch Monitor, nearly 1,000 students stayed away from class for the
rest of the semester as a result of the convoy attack.
22

The Philippines

EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

Where armed groups were the perpetrators, bombings were
among the most common incidents, along with assassinations
and kidnappings. State security forces also resorted to
arbitrary arrest or detention and excessive force that, at times,
resulted in death and injury. There were incidents of state
armed forces or security services, rebel groups and guerrillas
taking over or shutting down universities as well.
The largest number of higher education student casualties
during 2009-2012 was in Yemen where more than 73 were
killed and more than 139 injured in 2011, although it is not
known how many were targeted. The largest number of
arbitrary arrests of students was reported in Sudan where
more than 1,040 were arrested by security agents, the majority
of them in protests related to education or which began at, or
took place at, education institutions, according to human
rights and media reports.
Some of the most serious incidents involved raids by security
forces or armed groups on student dormitories or other forms
of campus residence in Côte d’Ivoire, Indonesia, Iran, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Sudan and Syria. In September 2013, gunmen
stormed a dormitory in the middle of the night at a college in
Yobe, Nigeria, killing as many as 50 students. In 2011 and
2012, security forces in Syria raided dormitories at Aleppo and
Damascus universities, killing seven students, injuring 49 and
arresting 330, according to media reports. In Sudan, some 450
student rooms at Omdurman Islamic University in Khartoum
were reportedly set on fire by security agents and supporters of
the National Congress Party in December 2012.

Long-term impact of attacks
In some countries, education authorities or NGOs have
documented the number of schools damaged or destroyed, or
the number of teachers or students killed or injured. But information is scant regarding the way such attacks affect the
provision of education in the long term, let alone their wider
social and economic impact. The study’s discussion of longterm impacts, therefore, is not restricted to situations where
attacks took place during the reporting period but draws on
experiences in countries where attacks have been documented
in the past as well.
Where attacks on schools, students and teachers are
persistent or the use of force – real or threatened – blocks
recovery from attacks, the effects, which impinge on student
attainment and access to good-quality education, can include:

• persistent demotivation and distraction of students,
teachers and other education staff by fear or psychological distress or trauma;
• chronic disruption of attendance or permanent drop-out
of students, teachers and other education staff;
• falling recruitment of staff, leading to teacher shortages,
and declining enrolment of students, hindering national
and global attempts to achieve Education for All (EFA),
the drive to achieve universal primary education and
other important educational goals.
All these effects have short-, medium- and long-term dimensions but the longer attacks persist or violence blocks recovery,
the deeper and more lasting the effects are likely to be.
In countries where attacks have persisted on a significant scale
year after year – many countries experienced attacks on
education long before the start of this study’s reporting period
– lengthy school closure has meant that hundreds of
thousands of children have been denied access to education,
sometimes for months or sometimes for years. For instance, in
Yemen, 54 schools were closed for up to two months after 143
attacks on education in 2011, affecting 182,000 students. In
Afghanistan, the Ministry of Education reported that more than
590 schools were closed in vulnerable areas as of May 2012,
compared to 800 or more in 2009. In some cases, security
threats or prolonged military use block them from being rebuilt
or reopened, as in India where by 2009 police had occupied
some schools for three years and one for a decade, and in
South Sudan, where armed forces occupied some schools for
up to five years. Often, where schools are damaged or
destroyed, the government lacks the capacity or will to rebuild
in a timely manner.
In higher education, attacks may not only endanger lives and
disrupt education, but also prove devastating for research and
teaching by triggering fear, flight and self-censorship among
whole academic communities. They also disrupt training of
teachers, education planners and managers.
Attacks on education can also exact a psychological toll, in the
short or long term, including distraction, distress and impaired
ability to study or teach.
Wider and long-term consequences for society include
restricting development and – particularly in the case of
attacks on higher education – hindering the emergence and
strengthening of political plurality, accountable government
and open democracy.

