
Afghanistan: Teaching goes on in a ruined classroom in Kabul, Afghanistan.© UNESCO/CI




asked police to increase patrols around schools. Unfortunately, these measures did not stop the attacks.85 In January 2007 a female teacher became the 73rd education worker to be murdered since 2004, shot by a pillion assassin. “The situation in the south is getting worse and we are worried about that,” said Sanguan Intarak, president of the Teachers’ Federation of Narathiwat. Teachers’ representatives have demanded yet more troops in the south and round-the-clock protection, not just an armed escort on the way to and from school.86 Practical security measures are not new. Since the massacre at Mai’alot school in Israel in 1974, Israeli children have lived for over 30 years with armed security in every school, armed guards on every ﬁ eld trip and sporting event, armoured buses and armed security on those buses. In Iraq the Ministry of Education assigns guards to primary and secondary schools in Baghdad.87 Research is needed to establish to what degree attacks have been deterred by these measures – as well as into the degree to which learning can be negatively affected by the transformation of a school into an armed encampment.In many countries, armed protection is not a realistic option where large numbers of institutions, staff or students are under threat, because the security forces are either already overstretched ﬁ ghting elsewhere or they simply do not have sufﬁ cient capacity. The former is the case in Iraq, given the high level of general violence they have to deal with, and the latter may be true of Afghanistan. In cases where the state is the aggressor, it is the security forces themselves that pose the threat.   Community defenceAn alternative preventive measure is to ﬁ nd ways to encourage local communities to defend schools. This approach is being developed in Afghanistan by the government, UNICEF and other partners. The strategy, initiated in June 2006, involves promoting community mobilization against attacks and positive responses in their aftermath. Religious and political leaders are being trained to be vigilant against attacks, reopen schools and persuade parents to send their children to school. School protection 

85 Human Rights Watch, 15 February 2007, ‘Insecurity and Attacks on Schools: Afghanistan and Iraq’.86 Selina Downes, www.Aljazeera.net, 11 January 2007, ‘Thai Teachers in the Line of Fire’.87 Damien Cave, New York Times, 29 January 2007, ‘Shell Hits Baghdad Girls’ School, Killing 5 Students’.

