



School buildings have been shelled, bombed or burned by rebels in a number of countries but also by official armies in Georgia, during the Russian intervention in 2008, and in the Gaza Strip during Israel’s Operation Cast Lead in late 2008 and early 2009. School buildings have been occupied by rebel and government forces in Brazil, India, Pakistan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.At the higher education level, there is less emphasis on attacking buildings and more on the targeting of individuals. Among teacher trade unionists, the emphasis is almost exclusively on individuals.The technology used for attack has changed little over the three years and ranges from the throwing of stones and lighting of fires to shelling and remotely detonating bombs. The two exceptions appear to be the use of poison gas, as mentioned earlier, and the use of mobile phone technology to remotely detonate bombs. The latter, for example, is used by separatists in Thailand to trigger roadside bombs against passing convoys carrying teachers to school. The availability of this technology may contribute to the increasing use of remotely detonated bombs against education targets in the Thai conflict, although earlier tactics of burning down schools or the shooting of individuals by pillion passenger assassins on motorbike have continued. There also seems to have been a trend towards using car bombs in Thailand since 2008. Nails, metal rods, ball bearings and the links of motorbike chains have been packed with explosives in PVC tubes, metal boxes and gas tanks to maximize the number of wounds inflicted. Some of the most brutal attacks have occurred in Thailand. On 20 February 2009, insurgents attacked soldiers returning from escorting teachers to a local school and beheaded two of them.71 One Buddhist teacher was shot in his parked car, then incinerated alive. Another was assassinated when four rebels dressed in school uniforms entered a classroom and shot him dead in front of pupils. In one incident in 2007, a man’s severed head was mounted on the gate to a middle school, while the heads of two other victims were strewn on a bridge and a road nearby.72The most unusual reported threat - and a paradoxical one given the perpetrators’ record on blowing up school buildings - is a diktat posted on walls by Maoist guerrillas in Bihar, India, in June 2009, warning that they would punish parents from marginalized communities if they did not send their children to school.73

71 AFP, “Two Soldiers Beheaded in Thai South: Police,” February 20, 2009.72 AFP, “Teachers Targeted in Thailand’s Deadly Insurgency,” March 20, 2008.73 Times of India, “Maoist Diktat in Bihar: Send Kids to School,” June 11, 2009. In April, Maoists had blown up a school mainly used by tribal children, who are among the most marginalized.

