



Monitoring and reporting As Nicholas Burnett, UNESCO’s then Assistant Director-General for Education, argued in the UN General Assembly debate on Education in Emergencies (18 March 2009), monitoring is essential because without it the resulting silence on the issue can serve to legitimate attacks. “Without monitoring, we cannot denounce, and without denunciation, we cannot act to protect education and to end impunity,” he said.11 In addition to assisting reporting, monitoring can act as a deterrent or be a useful tool for negotiations.12 Such documentation is also vital for improving rapid response, recovery measures and efforts to prevent future attacks.Currently, there is no global monitoring system for attacks on education. However, there is a growing international monitoring and reporting mechanism (MRM), established by Security Council Resolution 1612, for grave violations against children in situations of armed conflict. Among the six violations monitored under this resolution are attacks on schools. Until August 2009, the MRM only operated in countries where conflict parties are listed for widespread recruitment and use of child soldiers, although once listed the other five violations can be monitored. Even then, not all countries where significant levels of recruitment or use of child soldiers are reported have been listed: India is a prime example. As a result, the mechanism to monitor attacks on education via the MRM currently exists only in 14 countries, compared with 31 countries listed in this study as having experienced attacks on education between January 2007 and July 2009.In September 2009, the grave violations of killing and maiming children or rape and other grave sexual abuses were also made triggers for listing.13 Given that all six violations are to be monitored wherever listing is triggered, this expansion of criteria may benefit the monitoring and reporting of attacks on schools because it may widen the number of countries being looked at.However, the reality is that the non-trigger violations in general, and attacks on schools in particular, seem to get far less attention. Few recommendations have been made on how to improve protection of students and schools. 

11 Nicholas Burnett, Assistant Director-General for Education, UNESCO, (panel address, UN General Assembly Interactive Thematic Dialogue on Access to Education in Emergency, Post-Crisis and Transition Situations Caused by Man-Made Conflicts or Natural Disasters, New York, March 18, 2009).12 Ibid.13 This followed the adoption of Security Council Resolution 1882 on children and armed conflict. See Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, “UN Security Council Breaks New Ground to Protect Children in War,” August 4, 2009, http://www.un.org/children/conflict/pr/2009-08-04218.html. 

