
EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

military, ethnic, political, religious or sectarian group;
or in some cases by armed criminal groups. Attacks
may also be carried out by violent mobs that are not
organized as an armed group.
In reviewing available evidence, it appears that certain
types of attacks are more likely to be carried out by
government or government-backed forces,61 such as
arrests, imprisonment, torture and attacks on higher
education. These government-instigated attacks are
typically linked to motives such as restricting trade
union activity, quelling dissent and controlling information, or marginalizing a particular ethnic or political
group. Other types of attack may sometimes be
performed by government forces but are more likely to
be carried out by armed groups including progovernment paramilitaries and militia or
anti-government forces, such as abduction of
students and teachers and attacks on government
schools. They are often linked to motives that may
include spreading fear among civilians. When perpetrated by anti-government groups the motives may
include undermining government control over an area
or community, preventing the education of certain
groups such as girls, or reacting against perceived
bias in curricula and teaching that may reflect wider
social, religious or ethnic discrimination or conflict.
In some cases, there is a blurring of the line between
armed groups and armed criminal groups, and
between military and criminal motives. In some
countries, such as the Philippines,62 armed groups
have kidnapped teachers as a means to secure
ransom money to fund their activities. In Mexico,
killings, kidnappings and threats, particularly against
teachers, have reportedly been carried out by armed
criminal gangs.63 In Colombia, criminal groups have
attacked schools in similar ways to armed groups,
seeking to control territory and using schools as
recruitment grounds. In Medellín, for instance,
criminal groups, linked to paramilitary successor
groups,64 have threatened or killed students en route
to or from school.65
The study has found a wide range of motives ascribed
to the various attacks on education, but it is difficult to
draw any firm conclusions because it is hard to find
solid evidence for the motive behind many individual
incidents.

