



Statute might, under certain circumstances, cover attacks on education as defined by Education under Attack 2010:Article 8 of the Rome Statute dealing with war crimes prohibits the intentional direction of attacks against the civilian population (Art. 8(2)(b)(i) & Art. 8(2)(e)(i)) and against civilian objects (Art. 8(2)(b)(ii)) in times of international and non-international armed conflict. There is also a specific reference to the prohibition of intentionally directing attacks against buildings dedicated to education (Art. 8(2)(b)(ix) & Art. 8(2)(e)(iv)). An attack intentionally directed at a school as well as the civilians inside it would be prohibited both in terms of the general prohibition against attacking civilians and civilian objects as well as the specific prohibition against attacking educational buildings. The only caveat is that the building must not be being used for a military purpose or serve a military objective and the civilians must not be directly taking part in hostilities. Article 7, which concerns crimes against humanity, and applies in situations of both peacetime and armed conflict, protects civilians against such acts as murder, imprisonment, torture, rape, enforced disappearance, or other inhumane acts causing great suffering or serious injury to the body or mental or physical health. For any of these acts to qualify as a crime against humanity, however, they have to be committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack against a civilian population.According to the Rome Statute, there are three ways that a case may be brought before the ICC: A State Party can refer a situation to the Prosecutor;The Prosecutor may initiate investigations on the basis of information received from reliable sources. In this case, the Prosecutor must seek prior authorization from a Pre-Trial Chamber composed of three independent judges; orThe United Nations Security Council can refer a situation to the Prosecutor acting under Chapter VII of the UN Charter. Although any crime falling within the jurisdiction of the ICC is a serious matter by definition, the Rome Statute requires the OTP to determine that a case is of sufficient gravity to justify further action by the Court. Factors considered include the scale, nature, manner of commission and impact of the crimes.

