



Signs were painted on roofs of schools to prevent the government from bombing them, and hoarding messages were designed to ensure public awareness of the initiative.The programme was piloted in two of the worst affected districts. The most difficult part was developing ways of negotiating the codes of conduct, according to Melinda Smith, former education cluster lead in UNICEF’s Nepal office. At first, World Education tried to use government officials as negotiators but quickly realized this could endanger students and staff. Instead, they trained trusted local community members, mostly women, to serve as facilitators. “The facilitators played the central role in engaging both the government and the Maoists by putting social pressure on each to take part, playing on their desire to be seen in a positive light in both communities,” notes Smith. “Since the Maoists had brothers, nephews and nieces attending the local schools they were persuaded to support codes of conduct not only to help their relatives, but to be consistent with the Maoists’ message of universal free public education”.253Contact was established with the Maoists via human rights activists who had helped protect Maoist lives. It was too dangerous for the facilitators to meet with the Maoists directly so negotiations involved a backdoor shuttle process enabling facilitators to operate without fear of retribution. A key factor was mobilizing local journalists to act as monitors of any agreed code, which was posted at the front of schools, Smith argues.As the conflict escalated, participants agreed that there was a need to create district-wide codes of conduct to underpin the school-based codes. They also noted the need to develop peace education/conflict resolution modules for the community and schools. The codes included clauses such as “No arrest or abduction of any individual within the premises”; “No use of school to camp, never consider school premises as possible target, no use of school as armed base, no use of school uniforms for camouflaging purposes”.254 Negotiations in two districts proved successful, with 39 schools in six targeted villages declaring themselves “Zones of Peace”. A district 

253 Ibid., 266.254 Smith, “Nepal Case Study: Schools as Zones of Peace,” sample code of conduct.

A poster in Nepal advocating for schools as zones of peace and for prohibiting political and violent actions against schools.© UNICEF Nepal/CWIN/2008 

