
PART II — THeMATIC eSSAYS

to launch attacks or as observation posts. Their use for
such purposes may have a profound impact on educational provision, even to the extent that it may result in
the destruction of essential educational infrastructure.
Some acts that might seem positive to a military
commander, such as deploying a fighting force to
provide much needed security for a school, may
actually have negative consequences; the presence of
fighters in or around a school may render it a legitimate target for opposing forces. The close proximity
of military forces guarding a school may actually
attract the very assault they are attempting to prevent.
Armed conflict is an enduring feature of the international system. It should be possible, however, to
mitigate its worst effects by modifying the behaviour
of the fighting forces of parties to conflict. Their
actions can have profoundly damaging effects and
there is a responsibility on all concerned to take
measures to mitigate these negative impacts. Action
of any sort to reduce the effects of armed conflict on
education should be accorded a high priority. It is
necessary, however, to be realistic and pragmatic
about what is possible in that regard.

The military use of schools and
universities today
The GCPEA report Lessons in War: Military Use of
Schools and Other Education Institutions during
Conflict (2012) reveals clear evidence of the use of
educational institutions by the forces of parties to
conflict in armed conflicts in at least 24 countries in
Africa, Asia, Europe, the Middle East and South
America from 2005 to 2012.362 In all 24 of these
countries, state armed forces were among those using
schools and universities, non-state actors used
schools and universities in 17 of these countries, and
other international actors used schools and universities in at least five of these countries.363
The evidence, however, almost certainly underrepresents the extent of military use of schools and
universities. For instance, not all ‘conflicts’ were
included in Lessons in War. ‘Criminal insurgency’364
has frequently been excluded from legal definitions of

