



Jeanne Ward and Mendy Marsh for the United Nations Population Fund.246 A study of raped widows of genocide victims in Rwanda found 67 per cent of survivors were HIV-positive. Attempts to meet the medical and psychological needs of survivors of war rapes are hampered by lack of facilities or specialist knowledge. Interviews with women IDPs in Kosovo, East Timor and Colombia revealed that state-run facilities were difficult to access. In most conflict situations, humanitarian organizations are struggling to make the most basic of services accessible.Recovery measures for academics In higher education, several of the international networks that advocate on behalf of threatened scholars also help relocate them to the sanctuary of safe institutions in other countries. Robert Quinn of Scholars at Risk says: “Our primary work is essentially the worst case scenario, which is when there are no means to protect somebody in their country, and we are losing their mind, their voice, their contribution, so we try to organize emergency relocation to a sanctuary, a university elsewhere”.Scholars at Risk, based in New York, and the Scholar Rescue Fund, based in the Institute of International Education, also in New York, work together and separately to help endangered academics find sanctuary. Between them, they identify academics in need of rescue and provide, find or fund temporary academic positions in the US, Canada, Europe and more recently in Jordan and the Middle East. CARA, the UK-based Council for Assisting of Refugee Academics, has tended to make grants available to academics who have come to the UK and made a claim for refugee status. The grants enable them to register for PhDs and MScs. Hardship grants are also provided for academics struggling to support their families, having lost their means of income.In addition, CARA is piloting continuing professional development programmes for Iraqi academics in exile and a research fellowship programme to support innovative international research projects involving Iraqi academics.Quinn accepts that there is a need for earlier intervention, before the point at which academics are under such pressure from death threats or experience of arrest or torture that they have to leave a country. “We are trying to identify intervention points 

246 Jeanne Ward and Mendy Marsh, Sexual Violence Against Women and Girls in War and its Aftermath: Realities, Responses, and Required Resources (United Nations Population Fund (UNPFA), 2006).

