
EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

The study differs from previous publications of Education
under Attack in 2007 and 2010: it covers a different length of
time; significantly more resources were employed to
undertake the research; and it set out to provide extensive
coverage of a wider range of incidents. In particular, there is an
additional focus on military use of education buildings and
facilities and on attacks on higher education, compared to the
two earlier studies. It is difficult, therefore, to draw conclusions
about trends over time when comparing the data of this study
with those of previous studies.

School torched
by a sectarian mob
education in Myanmar faced a new and violent threat
from Buddhist nationalists in central and eastern
regions in 2013 as schools and students were attacked
in outbursts of sectarian violence. In one incident in
March 2013, a 200-strong mob of Buddhists marched on
a Muslim school in Meiktila, according to media reports.
The teachers heard that they were coming and took the
students out into a patch of bush near the school to
hide. When the mob reached the school they torched it
and went looking for the students. When they found
them, they clubbed them with staves and, in some
cases, poured petrol on them and set them alight. They
decapitated one student after they caught him hiding in
the undergrowth. In total, 32 students and four teachers
were killed. Seven Buddhists were later jailed in
connection with the school massacre.

The research team gathered data for this study from a wide
range of secondary sources – including United Nations (UN)
monitoring and reporting, research by human rights groups
and media reports – with differing purposes and varying levels
and methods of verification. Additional data were gathered by
information requests sent to UN agencies and international
and local NGOs; phone interviews with in-country experts; and
in some cases via further in-country research by experienced
human rights researchers and journalists. The findings from
the different sources have been collated, summarized and
cross-checked against each other for reliability and accuracy.
The study was also extensively reviewed by
experts in human rights, international law,
education-in-emergencies and research
methodology. However, it has not been
possible to verify every incident.
The study gauges the scale and nature of
violent attacks on education in the 30 profiled
countries, as well as military use of schools and
universities. It also examines their impact on
education and the responses that communities
and governments, with support from national
and international agencies, have taken to
address the problem, drawing upon a
cumulative understanding of the impact of
attacks since the issue was first studied
globally and examining good practices across
the world.

