
strategy. These could be developed as part of a
broader strategy of reducing overall violence that
would turn higher education communities into less
vulnerable or soft targets, while simultaneously recognizing the dilemmas of securitization/militarization,
especially when the state is the only or main perpetrator of attacks.
Lobbying and advocacy could also be fruitfully
targeted at national governments to emphasize their
responsibilities for protecting higher education from
attack and the potential legal sanctions if they fail to
do so. Linked to this, there is a need to increase
awareness and understanding of attacks on higher
education as part of the problem of attacks on
education more generally. While there have been great
strides made over recent years in raising awareness of
attacks on education around the world, evidence and
advocacy on the higher education sector have been
noticeably lagging.

EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

Steven Haines

Military use of schools
and universities:
changing behaviour
Research shows it is common for state military
forces and armed groups to use schools and
universities as bases, barracks, night shelters,
fighting positions and detention centres during
conflict, often with serious consequences. It
makes them a target for the enemy, it causes
damage and destruction of facilities, it can put
students, teachers and academics at risk from
incoming fire or soldiers’ misconduct and it can
deprive students of classes for long periods or
lead to their dropping out of education. How can
a change in military behaviour be achieved?
This chapter explores why an effective approach
to better protecting schools and universities
from military use is through the adoption and
implementation of international guidelines
In March 2010, Human Rights Watch researchers
visited a government elementary school for Muslim
children in the southern Thai village of Ban Klong
Chang. The Royal Thai Army Ranger force had been
using the grounds of the school for the previous two
years, occupying about half of the school playing field.
The paramilitary soldiers were armed with pistols and
military assault rifles. One of the children at the school
told the researchers that they were allowed to touch
the weapons but were not allowed to carry them.
Despite the apparently friendly atmosphere, with
soldiers playing with students, some of the students
expressed fears. They said they worried that the guns
might hurt them. They also said that they were
frightened because the presence of the soldiers
meant that they and their friends might be hurt if
fighting broke out between the Rangers and the
opposing forces.
Both the students and their parents were concerned
that the teachers were unable to do their jobs as

successfully as they would if the school was just being
used as a school. There was a strong awareness in the
small village community of the extent to which the
soldiers’ presence was adversely affecting the
children’s schooling. Some of the girls were worried
about the soldiers touching them and one of them
said she was not happy that the soldiers asked her if
she had an older sister. The possibility of sexual
harassment of the girls was a general fear for both
parents and students, and one mother expressed
concern that her daughter might become pregnant by
the soldiers. The Rangers brewed and drank an herbal
narcotic drink in the school and some of the students
had apparently tried it themselves. The games that
students played also became increasingly militarized.
Inevitably, given their concerns, some parents
removed their children from the school but attendance
at an alternative school required the children to travel
an extra hour each day. There was no general
opposition to the soldiers’ presence in the locality –
just a widely held feeling that they should not be using
the school and that their presence was having a bad
effect on education.361
As this single example illustrates, during armed
conflict there is the potential for considerable interaction between those delivering and receiving
education and those doing the fighting, be they
members of states’ armed forces or those belonging to
armed non-state groups. This chapter discusses the
various forms military use of schools and universities
can take and considers ways in which the behaviour of
military forces might be changed to reduce that use,
including through the development of international
guidelines. It describes the content of Draft Guidelines
developed last year under the auspices of GCPEA and
how these are being taken forward for adoption. It
concludes with a brief discussion of how different
states and armed non-state actors might choose to
implement them.
Military commanders or the leaders of armed nonstate groups may regard school buildings as ideal for
use as headquarters, barracks or stores for military
equipment. Schools often have fenced or walled
perimeters making security relatively straightforward.
During active hostilities, their buildings can be used
as defensive positions, as good locations from which

