
local community leaders and links to offer protection
is much weaker. Local people may not identify with a
university, which likely draws its student population
from a wide area, in the same way that they do with the
schools their own children attend.
Furthermore, community-based protection often
implies negotiation and bargaining with religious
leaders or ideology-driven armed groups. But such
people may not see higher education students and
academics – who are often viewed as sources of
power or threats to power – as ‘neutral’ in the way that
younger schoolchildren and their teachers are
generally perceived. Negotiating security would
therefore probably require a much greater degree of
trade-off and compromise, which might in turn be
detrimental to academic freedom or the rights of
specific groups within the university, such as female
students. Moreover, community-based measures are
likely to offer little protection against violence or
coercion by the institutions of the state itself.

Negotiated codes of conduct as protective/preventive
measures
Initiatives of negotiation to turn schools into safe
sanctuaries, such as the Schools as Zones of Peace
programme carried out in Nepal, have not yet been
applied to protecting higher education communities
from attack. It is thus not clear whether, to what extent
and how they would work at this level. The university,
unlike the school, is often a setting for intense
political debate. Higher education communities often
seek greater autonomy and academic freedom to
engage in teaching, research and debates on pressing
societal issues; consequently, they might be resistant
to strategies that could be perceived as requiring a
trade-off between unfettered academic activity and
security. At the same time, the rapid expansion of
international higher education partnerships and
exchanges, ranging from higher education ministries
to institutions and administrators, academics and
students, may create opportunities for negotiating
standards of behaviour, including increased
protection. Large, influential higher education
networks and associations in particular, with increasingly global memberships where participation and
good standing are prerequisites for international

EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

recognition and prestige, may provide platforms for
norm-setting.346 Pilot studies, research and consultation with stakeholders are needed to better
understand under what conditions such participatory
processes might lead to agreements, codes of conduct
and the standards which strengthen the status of
universities as zones of peace.

Accountability measures
Reducing impunity for perpetrators of attacks on
higher education communities is essential to
providing justice to victims, deterring future attacks
and combating some of the most harmful negative
impacts of attacks on higher education, including selfcensorship, isolation, involuntary exile and brain
drain.
While non-state actors are often implicated in attacks,
states and state-entities bear primary responsibility
for protecting higher education communities. Yet too
often states and state-entities are themselves implicated in attacks on higher education communities,
directly or indirectly, or they fail to investigate
incidents and hold perpetrators accountable. UN
agencies, governments and international civil society
organizations, including both human rights organizations and international higher education networks
and associations, must do more to pressure states to
recognize and adhere to their responsibilities.
Campaigns aimed at raising awareness of attacks on
higher education should emphasize state action and
responsibilities and might include positive,
negotiated approaches to encouraging more effective
protection and prevention measures by states, as well
as more adversarial efforts to improve protection,
including highlighting state involvement, complicity
or failures to protect in reporting and inter-state
mechanisms and bringing formal legal complaints
under existing legal standards.
As to the latter, international humanitarian, human
rights and criminal law provides general rights and
protections which higher education and members of
higher education communities enjoy to the same
extent as other institutions and citizens, such as the
protection regarding the physical integrity of civilians
and infrastructure not used for military purposes, the

right to freedom of expression, and so forth.347 In
addition, certain international instruments offer
specific protections to higher education, including the
International Labour Organization (ILO) core
Conventions 87 and 98 on freedom of association and
the right to collective bargaining, and the UNESCO
Recommendation on the Status of Higher Education
Teaching Personnel defining autonomy and academic
freedom. Efforts should be made to encourage and
reinforce local and international legal practitioners in
using the laws at their disposal to advocate for the
protection of higher education communities and their
members.

Reporting and advocacy measures
Monitoring and reporting
Monitoring means the systematic collection and
analysis of information. Accurate information about
individual attacks or national patterns is crucial for
enhancing prevention and providing protection.
However, information is often lacking as to ‘who’ and
‘what’ is targeted, the reasons behind attacks, and the
effects and trends over time.348
Several actors have an explicit or implicit mandate to
monitor and respond to attacks on education.
Theoretically, governments are in the best position to
monitor attacks on higher education but this
monitoring is often inadequate and where state
security or armed forces are the perpetrator of attacks,
they may not be trusted or appropriate. Efforts at
collecting data should be complemented by the work
of police, prosecutors and criminal courts for investigating and prosecuting attacks that constitute
criminal violations under domestic and international
law. UN bodies can also play a monitoring role, while
international and local NGOs may help to fill the gaps
of UN monitoring systems or to compensate for the
lack of will or capacity of government authorities. The
UN and NGOs may have to take the lead where the
government is itself the source of the abuse.349
In Colombia, the Ombudsman’s office monitors
human rights situations in many areas, working as an
early warning system for preventing abuses. It has
played a pivotal role in reporting threats to, and
attacks on, communities, trade unionists and

