



unleashed a period of extreme local instability in many regions. Intra-state tension emerged as the dominant form of conﬂ ict, with ethnic majorities and minorities vying to establish new borders or impose old ones, and, throughout it all, education has retained the capacity to be either a trigger for increased tension or a catalyst for hope, stability and reconciliation. Removing attacks on education from the arena of conﬂ ict may require a more concerted effort to transform education into a force for inclusion, tolerance and understanding. “Schools should be places where people leave certain things at the doorstep and learn to understand and work together on different things,” says Cream Wright.This vision is not merely about what you teach children. It is not simply about having a peace curriculum, for example, but about the way the school is run, the whole ethos of the organization. Pupils must come to believe that the school stands for certain values and take those on board. It is about the way the school conducts itself, the way rules are transparent and fairly applied, the way difference is recognized and valued. According to Sheldon Shaeffer: “It is especially important that schools are sanctuaries for children. Genuinely child-friendly schools, where cultural, religious and linguistic diversity is respected and welcomed, can do much in the long term to stop the increasingly critical cycle of violence against children.”The notion of safe sanctuaries – just as churches used to be seen as safe sanctuaries in many countries – builds on the experience of emergency education projects that recognize that the priority for parents in post-emergency situations is to provide safe spaces for children, where they can be protected, and given food, water and shelter, for four or ﬁ ve hours a day so that the adults can begin to turn to the business of rebuilding their lives. The international community needs to look more deeply at the role education can play in easing tension. While the traditional means of military force and political dialogue will always be important, there is a case for thinking outside the traditional box and recognizing the impact that a resilient education system can have in reducing conﬂ ict and the role a rapidly re-emerging one can play in building peace. Moving beyond emergency-education packages, there is a need to ﬁ nd a way to promote and protect mutual, inclusive education in conﬂ ict-affected countries. “Whereas with religion you can say that is your church, that is your synagogue or that is your mosque, and therefore I am going to burn it down, the school should be a mutual place that is our school, for all of us,” says Cream Wright. “I think if we 

