



of 2009, UNICEF staff could not travel in half of the country due to the high level of risk, and the agency had to rely heavily on local partners to carry out its work.A further obstacle to providing accurate data is government hostility to information being made public, whether to protect its own image, to prevent information harming national interests such as tourism or development assistance, or because it is in denial about such attacks occurring. For instance, Human Rights Watch has not been able to update its 2002 estimate that the Myanmar army employs 70,000 child soldiers. According to Human Rights Watch, the government claims it does not allow anyone to enlist and, therefore, there are no official statistics. Moreover, restrictions on the freedom of movement of UN and NGO staff, as well as other access and security concerns, severely limit the ability to monitor this issue in a manner that can lead to precise estimations of recruitment levels.59Curiously, even the ending of a conflict can make information gathering more difficult. In Nepal, after a peace agreement was signed in 2006 between the Maoist rebels and the government, attacks on education continued, particularly in the Terai region, but were harder to track because they were being carried out by smaller, less visible armed groups.Prekshya Ojha, Director of the Documentation and Dissemination Department at INSEC, a human rights NGO in Nepal, says: “There are groups mobilizing there who say they are fighting for their rights - some are ethnic groups, some are armed groups. But some incidents may not be politically motivated, they may just be criminal activities. In these cases when people are abducted it is difficult to find out the reason why. They may just be armed groups asking for a ransom”.60A general difficulty in reporting some types of attacks is the lack of disaggregated data by profession or education-specific information. For instance, it is hard to find a breakdown of the number of education aid workers killed within the total of aid workers killed, the numbers of child soldiers recruited from schools, or the numbers of teachers or education staff killed in a bombing in front of a school. Similarly, the information may not exist to determine whether particular individuals are killed because they are teachers or students going to school, or for multiple other possible reasons. It raises questions about whether the categorization of the violation is defined by motive or effect. This study takes a rights-based approach: if the violent political or 

59 Information supplied by Bede Sheppard, researcher, Human Rights Watch.60 Prekshya Ojha, Director of Documentation and Dissemination Department, INSEC, interview with the author, August 13, 2009.

