



Since then, the threat to schools has been made more explicit. According to Human Rights Watch, a leaflet found near a government school that had been burned down in May 2007 said: Warning! To all Patani89 MuslimsNow Patani Muslims are at war with the occupying forces of Siamese infidels. You must be aware that our attacks on the symbols of their occupying forces – such as burning of schools – are carried out to completely destroy the Siamese infidels’ rule. You are warned not to send your children to their schools. They will convert your children, and take away their awareness as Patani Muslims. You must send your children to ponoh90. You are warned not to cooperate with and not to help – by providing money or labour – the occupying forces of Siamese infidels to rebuild their schools. Any assistant to the occupying forces of Siamese infidels is a sin, and will be severely punished.91Some teachers are targeted in reprisals for alleged abuses by Thai armed forces or police, Human Rights Watch reports. An attack in which gunmen opened fire on and seriously injured four teachers driving home in a pick-up truck from Ben Luemu School in Yala’s Krong Penang District was preceded by warnings from militants that they would kill teachers in revenge for the murder of their leader Ustadz92 Hamayidin, whom they believed had been assassinated by soldiers. Villagers found leaflets near the intersection where the attack happened, which were written in Thai and said: “You killed our Ustadz, we kill your innocent teachers”.93 Sometimes, teachers are held hostage as a means of pressing the Thai authorities to release arrested militants.Mirroring the use of government schools to promote assimilation, the private Malay Muslim schools are alleged to have been turned into their own vehicle for recruiting child militants, with pupils being urged by teachers to defend their ethnic and religious identity.94There are an estimated 1,000 pondok (traditional madrasa) schools in the south, where 80 per cent of the population are Muslim and speak Malay, not Thai.“Recruiters appeal to a sense of Malay nationalism and pride in the old Pattani sultanate,” says Rungrawee Chalermsripinyorat, ICG’s Thailand analyst. “They tell 

89 ‘Patani’ is the original Jawi spelling, used by Malays, of ‘Pattani’.90 ‘Ponoh’ are Muslim schools.91 This leaflet is held on file by Human Rights Watch and is reproduced in their report HRW, No One is Safe.92 ‘Ustadz’ means Islamic teacher.93 HRW, No One Is Safe.94 International Crisis Group (ICG), Recruiting Militants in Southern Thailand, Asia Report no. 170 (June 22, 2009).

