



schools, and provision of security escorts for teachers and students travelling to and from school. Whether these are provided depends both on the availability of security manpower and whether security chiefs are persuaded of the importance of devoting resources to defending education targets. In some contexts, the task of persuasion may be harder because education is less valued, security budgets and manpower are stretched or because the ruling elite is less motivated to protect people from a particular region or social or ethnic group. As the drive to achieve Education for All continues to reduce the number of children not in school worldwide, the proportion of those still going without education who live in countries affected by conflict is increasing. It is therefore precisely in the areas affected by insecurity and fragility that the job of mobilizing support for protection of schools is most needed if Education for All is to be achieved. Cooperation is needed between ministries of education and security-related ministries on this issue.An example from Iraq shows the importance of raising the consciousness of protecting education beyond the boundaries of a particular ministry. In Iraq in 2007, school examinations for 150,000 secondary students were seriously disrupted by militants entering examination halls and killing teachers and students. MPs pressed for a different approach in 2008, for cooperation between the army, police, security and education ministries. And they ensured that the examinations were moved into university buildings where they could more easily be protected. According to Alaa Makki, President of Iraq’s Parliamentary Education Committee, the key was a drive to “expand the importance of education in the minds of military officials and politicians”.214The chaos caused by the attacks in 2007, combined with problems of corruption, resulted in an inflated 85 per cent pass rate, with 25,000 more students qualifying for university places than the available 85,000 places could accommodate. But neighbouring countries Syria and Jordan, which had taken many Iraqi students in the past, refused to recognize the examination results, so all of the successful students had to be squeezed into the existing system. “We didn’t want to leave students hanging around on the streets, where they can be absorbed by the militias, giving them money to buy arms and do bad things,” says Makki.  The universities, as a result, had to accommodate a temporary population bulge, which is now working its way through the system and putting a strain on resources. 

214 Brendan O’Malley, “Baghdad Battles for Better Education,” South China Morning Post, January 17, 2008.

