
armed conflict because it is motivated by greed rather
than a political objective. Importantly, however,
International Humanitarian Law says nothing about
the motives driving rival forces – something acknowledged by the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC)365 – so criminal gangs may be engaged in a form
of armed conflict if the intensity of armed violence
reaches a threshold level, as it has done in Mexico, for
example.
There is also a degree of under-reporting of military
use of schools and universities. This is not always
deliberate and can be related to the difficulties of data
capture in conflict zones. Nevertheless, governments
have suppressed information.366 Community leaders
may also fail to report such use for fear of retribution.
In any case, it is clear that military use of education
institutions has disrupted education provision in
many regions affected by conflict.
This is a serious problem. Military use of educational
institutions occurs in most regions affected by armed
conflict and assumes several forms. For these
reasons, GCPEA initiated a project to mitigate the
worst effects of military use of schools and universities by setting new standards to guide parties to
armed conflict.
Lessons in War analysed the military use of schools
and universities, categorizing the use to which they
are routinely put. The following seven different
categories of military use were identified:367

Bases and barracks
Bases or barracks are set up in school or university
buildings and grounds to accommodate fighters for
the medium to long term, providing them with access
to such amenities as cooking spaces, washing facilities and lavatories. Examples include:
• Across India, government paramilitary police
occupied schools. In 2010, before forces began
complying with court orders to vacate schools,
approximately 130 schools were being used,
particularly in states most affected by the
Maoist insurgency – Bihar, Chhattisgarh and
Jharkhand – but also in the country’s northeast, in Tripura, Manipur, Nagaland and
Assam.368

EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

• In Syria, schools have been used as barracks for
government forces with tanks at the school
gates and snipers posted on rooftops. Antigovernment forces have also used schools as
bases.369

Defensive and offensive positions or staging areas
Troops use school or university buildings as defensive
positions providing protection from enemy fire, observation posts, firing positions or locations from which
to direct attacks on opposing forces.
• During Ramadan in 2010, Al-Shabaab fighters
entered a school in Mogadishu and told the
students to stay in their classrooms. The
fighters set up a surface-to-air rocket launcher
and fired from inside the school compound at
territory held by the Somali government.
Government forces responded and one rocket
hit the school just as the students were finally
released, killing eight on their way home.370
• For six months in 2011, Yemeni government
forces occupied the Superior Institute for
Health Science, a school for pharmacists and
physicians’ assistants on high ground in the
city of Ta’izz. Dozens of troops occupied the
medical laboratory and the pharmacology
department, as well as the roof. A machine gun
was mounted on an armoured vehicle in the
yard and machine gun and mortar rounds were
fired from the school while classes were in
session.371

Weapons and ammunition storage
In order to hide or simply store weapons and
ammunition, armed forces and armed groups have
stockpiled weapons and ammunition in schools and
school grounds.
• In 2010, the Armed Forces of the Philippines
and their irregular auxiliary force (the Citizen
Armed Force Geographical Units) used
functioning public schools to store weapons
and ammunition.372
• During an international assessment in 2011 in
Côte d’Ivoire following the arrest of former
President Laurent Gbagbo and the cessation of

hostilities, three schools were found to contain
firearms and ammunition.373
• In 2012, the UN verified 36 incidents of schools
in Yemen being used for weapons storage,
sometimes resulting in their closure.374

Detention and interrogation centres
Armed forces and armed groups have converted
schools into sites of detention and interrogation.
Sometimes, classrooms are used temporarily to hold
or interrogate individuals, possibly in connection with
other military activities in or around the school.
• In Syria in 2011, government authorities established numerous temporary holding centres in
schools during massive detention campaigns
while anti-government demonstrations were
underway. While in the schools, some
detainees were subjected to torture during
interrogation.375
• The Israeli Defence Forces have used schools in
the West Bank for detention and interrogation
while arresting anyone in the community aged
between 17 and 50.376
• During the armed conflict in Libya in 2011,
schools were converted into improvised
detention centres. Tajura Primary School, for
example, became a prison for several hundred
combatants who fought in support of the
Gaddafi regime.377

Military training
Schools and universities make ideal locations for
military training, fitness programmes and weapons
training for new recruits.
• In 2011, anti-Gaddafi forces in Libya conducted
training in schools. Journalists documented at
least one instance of rebel leaders using a
secondary school to instruct soldiers in the use
of anti-aircraft guns.378
• During 2012, Islamist armed groups controlling
northern Mali trained new recruits, including
children, in both private and public schools as
well as in Koranic schools.379

