



The Maoist insurgency ended in November 2006, with the signing of a peace agreement, but child rights activists say the rehabilitation of children has been neglected by the government. “There is a really crucial need to rehabilitate and heal the children, who continue to be haunted by their terrible ordeals,” psychosocial counsellor Sukmaya Sunwar told IRIN. 201 In some situations, it is hard to distinguish between the impact of specific attacks on education and collateral damage. The Ministry of Education and Science said the Russian military action in 2008 had serious consequences for Georgia’s education system. In the short-term, the start of the 2008-9 academic year had to be postponed in many areas. The widespread use of landmines and cluster bombs by the Russian army had made many buildings unsafe, requiring de-mining before they could be re-opened. In addition, many schools were seriously or lightly damaged by shelling, bombing, gunfire, being burnt down and looting, as well as by wear and tear from use as emergency accommodation for internally displaced people (IDPs). Many children were suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder, anxiety crises and depression. More than 400 IDP children, accompanied by paediatric psychologists, were sent to Poland and the Ukraine for care. Another 100 were due to join them. In addition, psychological rehabilitation was being provided for 50 teenagers in special recreation camps in Tskneti.202The cost of helping IDPs and restoring infrastructure led to a reported 20 per cent cut in the Ministry of Education and Science’s budget, forcing it to terminate or suspend programmes to support students living in conflict zones, preparatory classes for admissions examinations, grants covering tuition fees at universities, and up to 100 science programmes. The Ministry of Education said that if other programmes had to be suspended or terminated as well, the entire future of Georgia’s education reform programme would be at risk.203 Publishing of textbooks had come to a halt, as had the privatization of vocational education and training (VET). Training of principals and teachers had been interrupted. Up to 63 schools had to delay opening for some months, forcing 17,000 students to move to other schools.204 The future of key programmes supporting minority integration, inclusion, school partnerships, community mobilization, prisoner education, pre-school education, extracurricular activity and street children were at risk.

201 Ibid.202 Ministry of Georgia, Russian Invasion of Georgia: Facts and Figures, September 25, 2008203 Ibid.204 Ibid.

