
MeTHODOLOGY

Methods of data collection and analysis
The research team undertook a comprehensive review
of the literature in English and conducted research
into and analysis of information made available by UN
agencies, human rights and development organizations, government bodies, scholar rescue
organizations and trade unions as well in media
reports, using standard sets of research terms. To
research specific incidents, online searches were
carried out using a detailed list of combinations of
search terms for each country. The terms included the
name of the country or geographic area, year, type of
victim or target, and type or method of attack. The
resulting information was then screened for reliability
and compatibility with the study’s definitions and
terms of reference. For media and human rights
sources, reliability was assessed using a range of
criteria, including in the case of media reports,
whether a professional news agency was used,
whether the language was objective, whether professional standards of good-quality journalism had been
observed and whether there appeared to be any
political bias. Where there was uncertainty about the
quality or independence of the source, advice on its
reliability was sought from in-country researchers and
development and human rights experts.
Tailored online research was carried out in four
languages: English, French, Spanish and, to a limited
extent, Arabic. In addition, a detailed questionnaire
on incidents in 2009-2012 was sent to selected field
offices of some GCPEA member agencies to
complement information culled during the extensive
review of government, UN, NGO and media reports
covering 2009-2012. More limited research was
carried out into incidents in the first nine months of
2013.
Semi-structured interviews were conducted with
members of human rights and development organizations and relevant trade unions in affected countries,
as well as those monitoring particular countries.
Focused follow-up investigations were carried out by
researchers based in a small number of affected
countries, including Colombia, Egypt, Mexico,
Thailand, Yemen and Zimbabwe.

