
PART III — COUNTRY PROFILeS

from the scene. The gunman asked for Malala by name
before shooting her in the face and neck and then
turning his gun on the two girls on either side of her.1222
Malala required life-saving surgery. The Tehreek-eTaliban Pakistan (TTP) spokesman, Ehsanullah Ehsan,
claimed responsibility, saying that the 15-year-old was
attacked for promoting values he said were secular
and anti-Taliban. Malala had written an anonymous
blog for the BBC about life as a schoolgirl under the
Taliban. She then campaigned publicly for girls’
education after the military ousted the TTP from the
Swat Valley.1223 Malala survived and went on to
campaign internationally on the same issue, and was
invited to address youth representatives at the UN
General Assembly in New York in July 2013.1224
Across Pakistan, there were at least five school bus
attacks.1225 In one attack in September 2011, Taliban
militants fired a rocket at a school bus transporting
students home from Khyber Model School near
Peshawar. When the rocket missed they opened fire
with guns on one side of the vehicle. A pupil aged 15
said he managed to help some younger pupils off the
bus under gunfire, only to encounter another volley of
bullets opening up from the second side. He was one
of 12 injured children. Four students and the driver
died.1226 Most of the other bus attacks were bombings,
including one on a bus carrying disabled schoolchildren in Peshawar in May 2009, injuring seven
students.1227
Attacks on school teachers and other education
personnel
A compilation of media and human rights reports
suggests that at least 15 school teachers were killed in
2009-20121228 and at least eight were injured,1229 of
whom four were female victims of acid attacks.1230 At
least four other education personnel, comprising one
provincial education minister, two school bus drivers
and a security guard, were killed1231 and two more were
injured. Many of the attacks, particularly against
women, appeared to be motivated by the militant
stance against female education and against women
working outside the home.1232 But in most cases, the
motive was not confirmed.
Other attacks took place in the context of civil conflict
in Balochistan. Human Rights Watch and the Human

