



spectrum, including supporters of the opposition or anti-government elements such as the Taliban, for consultations to find out why schools have remained closed.Some objected to using the term “school”; others feared the curriculum or regulations were anti-Islamic. So the government allowed the word “school” to be changed to “madrasa”. It also permitted communities to nominate a locally trained teacher of their choice to join the school’s staff and ensure that nothing anti-Islamic was taking place. Further, it challenged people to root through the curriculum or textbooks, reassuring them that anything found to be anti-Islamic would be changed. These compromises increased local people’s sense of ownership of schools and the curriculum.By March 2009, 161 schools had re-opened compared to 35 in 2007-8. And in the crucial first month of term, when schools are particularly vulnerable to attack, there were no violent incidents.Another example of successful negotiations to avoid attacking schools has taken place in Nepal. In a “Schools as Zones of Peace” initiative, Maoist rebels and government forces and civil society groups negotiated and agreed to abide by codes of conduct for each school that prohibited attacks on, abduction from, or military use of schools. It was piloted successfully during the conflict in two districts and scaled up after the ceasefire, when ethnic fighting continued.Again, the negotiations seemed to succeed because the process was facilitated by the community, there was buy-in from the armed opposition, and there was local leadership of schools. The additional advantage in Nepal was the Maoists’ public commitment to universal education. More research is needed into similar initiatives in order to establish what conditions can encourage negotiation of respect for schools as sanctuaries or zones of peace.Further research is also needed into whether the inclusion of education in peace agreements in countries where education has been a target for attack is a useful way to encourage measures that will reduce the risk of future attack and remove education as a source of tension.Education can become a force for peace instead of a target for attack, if it is directed towards the promotion of tolerance, understanding and respect for local culture, language and identity, and is run in a fair and inclusive way. Giving parents a say in the running of schools is one way to achieve this. Ensuring transparency in the running of institutions and, in higher education, upholding academic freedom are critical factors.

