



“There is also an ideological effect of the attacks against schools, in the removal of a basic human right. Therefore, attacks also deny the purposes of this specific human right of education, which has to do with the construction of learning that dignifies life. This goal is based on respect for human diversity. The attacks on educational institutions, students and teachers mean direct and brutal attacks on the human condition”.182The physical effects of the bombing, shelling and burning of school and university buildings are relatively easy to gauge and include: loss of life; injury; the loss of places in which to learn; and the loss of learning materials, equipment and school furniture, research materials, computers, data, management information systems, specialist laboratories, and transport vehicles. The psychological effects of the murder, disappearance and torture of students, teachers and other staff are much harder to measure. They can include trauma, fear, insecurity, demotivation and despondency among students, parents, teachers, academics, support staff, aid workers, trade unionists and officials managing the system. In all types of attack, the educational impact is likely to extend far beyond the number of individuals and communities directly threatened. Public knowledge of repeated attacks and threats of attack gleaned from word-of-mouth or the media can spread fear throughout schools and universities, which may in fact be the intention of the perpetrators.“Attacks on education impede the right to education,” says Jan Eastman, Deputy Secretary General of Education International. “Education is an important right because it is about fulfilment as a citizen, as an individual, and attacks on education buildings and students and adults engaged in education impede that process. Children, particularly, don’t get that opportunity again”.183Long-term consequences for the quality of educationIf schools in an area are repeatedly attacked, children most likely will be afraid to go to school, parents will be afraid to send them and teachers will be afraid to go to work. 

182 Vernor Muñoz, interview with the author, August 27, 2009.183 Jan Eastman, interview with the author, August 27, 2009.

