



The Democratic Republic of the Congo In September 2003, the Prosecutor informed the States Parties that he was ready to request authorization to use his own powers to start an investigation into war crimes committed in the Ituri region, but that a referral and active support from relevant States would assist his work. In March 2004, the government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo referred the situation in its territory to the Court, and on 23 June 2004, the Prosecutor announced his decision to open the first investigation of the ICC. On 26 January 2009, following an earlier confirmation hearing before the Pre-Trial Chamber, the Lubanga trial commenced. The Office completed the presentation of its case on 14 July 2009 and the defence was scheduled to begin in October 2009. The trial of Katanga and Ngudjolo Chui was scheduled to commence in September 2009. The arrest warrant for Ntaganda was issued on 22 August 2006, but he remains at large in the DRC.Uganda In December 2003, the Office received a referral from the Government of Uganda concerning the crimes allegedly committed by the Lord’s Resistance Army. The Office subsequently notified Uganda that it would interpret the referral as concerning all crimes under the Statute committed in Northern Uganda and that its investigation would be conducted in an impartial manner. Following the Ugandan government’s acceptance of this interpretation, on 28 July 2004 the Office decided to open an investigation.Five arrest warrants were issued in July 2005. However, on 11 July 2007 proceedings against Laska Lukwiya were terminated due to his confirmed death. The Office also has submitted information to Chamber on the reported death of Vincent Otti. The surviving persons remain at large and LRA abductions of children in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sudan and the Central African Republic, some of them from schools, have not ceased during this period, which also saw an attack by the LRA on a teacher training institute in Sudan.Sudan: Darfur On 31 March 2005, the United Nations Security Council, acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, adopted Resolution 1593 referring the situation in Darfur, Sudan, since 1 July 2002, to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, in accordance with article 13(b) of the Rome Statute.

