
However, there are also a number of challenges,
including the following:
• Donor funding in conflict settings tends to be
short-term, seeking quick impact. This is often
incompatible with the long-term relationshipbuilding that working with communities often
requires.
• Variation in the composition of communities
means that one model of response might not fit
all contexts.
• Communities are not internally homogeneous.
Wider buy-in depends on working with a full
range of community members. However, there
may be language barriers between group
members or power dynamics that may slow
down activity implementation. Conversely,
more homogeneous communities may be less
likely to recognize the value of improved
relations since they interact less frequently with
members of the ‘other’ group. Therefore, they
may be less willing to collaborate with other
communities or minority groups.300
• Ethnic or religious divisions between agency or
government staff and community-level groups
may reflect the divisions that are at the heart of
the conflict.
• Language barriers may exist between international and national staff and the community
groups they are working with, especially in
more isolated communities. Furthermore,
literacy rates in many countries affected by
conflict tend to be low, particularly in remote
and hard-to-reach locations. This may limit
both physical and written outreach.301
• Relying on community volunteerism may mean
that initial programme costs are low. However,
this is not always sustainable. Over time, it may
lead to reduced community support, increased
costs or a halt in activities.302
• Community engagement may also transfer both
the responsibility for, and risk of, protecting
schools and providing security from state
actors to communities themselves. This may be
necessary in a conflict situation where the state

EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

has been weakened and is unable to provide
security for its citizens in vast geographical
areas within its territory or because the state
may be a perpetrator of violence affecting
communities. However, care should be taken to
ensure that the community having sole responsibility for protecting education is viewed only
as a short-term, gap-filling strategy. Ideally, the
state should be responsible for providing
security and protection to its citizens.
• Community engagement may be difficult where
certain communities or groups oppose specific
aspects of education.
Only by recognizing and addressing these challenges
can programme collaborations with communities be
successful. Programming must be adaptable and
solutions must be found jointly with community
members.

Conclusion and recommendations
Evidence exists that communities participate in a
broad variety of protective actions ranging from
prevention to response. Most protective action can be
implemented with communities at any of the four
levels of engagement – community-initiated,
community-implemented, community-inspired and
community-involved. Each has value depending on
the setting-specific needs. For example, external
actors often support and advise the establishment of
Zones of Peace or school management committees. In
other situations, communities themselves have
appointed unarmed guards or altered education
delivery mechanisms. And it may be inappropriate and
risky for external actors to initiate some activities,
such as protest and one-to-one negotiation with
armed non-state actors.
Before developing policies or programmes, external
actors, in collaboration with the communities they
seek to assist, should carry out in-depth analysis of
the nature of attacks on education, an assessment of
community attitudes to education and a mapping of
existing community action. These may inform their
decisions on how best to engage different communities.

Governments, donors, NGOs and UN agencies
typically assume that it is beneficial to engage
communities in protecting education. However, there
is very limited quantitative or qualitative data on the
impact of these actions. Further research should
explore the advantages and disadvantages of
community action and assess what forms of action
achieve the greatest impact while minimizing physical
risks or negative impacts on education quality.
While there are significant advantages to working with
communities, there are also challenges. These include
a possible lack of awareness of the value of education,
low literacy levels and intra-community tensions that
may hamper actions to protect education from attack.
Strong participatory monitoring systems need to be in
place to identify these issues early and mitigate any
negative effects on programming.
Finally, while community engagement has value, it is
also important not to forget that the state is the
ultimate duty-bearer with regards to education and
the protection of citizens. All programmes should seek
to support governments to implement durable
protective mechanisms once the context enables
them to do so.

Recommendations
For governments
• Encourage and invest in the development of
community-based mechanisms to protect
education. Incorporate these into education
sector plans and ensure that they are in line
with national policies and standards. These
may include: school management committees,
contingency plans, education awareness
campaigns, etc.
• Coordinate external actions and provide recognition for agreed alternative forms of education
that are common and reportedly effective
measures for protecting education in certain
settings such as community-based schools and
temporary learning spaces.
• Where appropriate, conduct a conflict risk
assessment to ensure that activities do not
heighten risk to education.

