
eNDNOTeS

137
For a more in-depth discussion of the legal frameworks protecting education,
please see British Institute of International and Comparative Law, Protecting
Education in Insecurity and Armed Conflict: An International Law Handbook
(Doha: Education Above All, 2012). See also: Geneva Academy of International
Humanitarian and Human Rights Law, United Nations Human Rights Mechanisms and the Right to Education in Insecurity and Armed Conflict (Doha: Protect
Education in Insecurity and Conflict, 2013); and British Institute of International
and Comparative Law, Education and the Law of Reparations in Insecurity and
Armed Conflict (Doha: Protect Education in Insecurity and Conflict, 2013).
138

British Institute of International and Comparative Law, Protecting Education
in Insecurity and Armed Conflict: An International Law Handbook (Doha:
Education Above All, 2012), 258.
139

See Art. 13 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights (ICESCR), which provides that:
“1. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the right of everyone to
education. They agree that education shall be directed to the full development of
the human personality and the sense of its dignity, and shall strengthen the
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. They further agree that
education shall enable all persons to participate effectively in a free society,
promote understanding, tolerance and friendship among all nations and all
racial, ethnic or religious groups, and further the activities of the United Nations
for the maintenance of peace.
2. (a) Primary education shall be compulsory and available free to all;
(b) Secondary education in its different forms, including technical and vocational
secondary education, shall be made generally available and accessible to all by
every appropriate means, and in particular by the progressive introduction of
free education;
(c) Higher education shall be made equally accessible to all, on the basis of
capacity, by every appropriate means, and in particular by the progressive introduction of free education;

Mayor of Zambrano Municipality, SU-256/99, Constitutional Court of Colombia,
April 21, 1999; and Wilson Finch and others v. the Mayor of La Calera, T-1206/01,
Constitutional Court of Colombia, November 16, 2001.
150

Ley Orgánica de Educación (2010).

