
number of attacks on education are not recognized as situations of conflict, such as Mexico and Zimbabwe.
In most countries affected by attacks on education, there is still
a need to strengthen monitoring and reporting partnerships
between UN agencies, international and national NGOs and
education ministries and district education offices to improve
data collection on attacks on schools (including data on the
long-term impact on education) and verification.
There is also a pressing need to fill the gap in global monitoring
and reporting of attacks on higher education. Monitoring such
attacks is not part of the remit of the UN-led MRM, which
focuses on grave violations against children and therefore
school-level incidents only.

Accountability and ending impunity
International human rights law, international humanitarian
law and international criminal law provide a strong legal
framework for protecting education, depending on the context.
However, impunity for those responsible for attacking
education is a persistent problem and urgently needs to be
addressed at national and international levels. Very few investigations of attacks or prosecutions of perpetrators have been
documented.
Achieving a reduction in or an end to the use of schools and
universities for military purposes may significantly reduce the
number of education institutions put at risk of attack, because
military use makes them a potential target. International
humanitarian law restricts the use of schools and universities
in support of a military effort, but it does not prohibit such use
in all circumstances.
Some countries have taken the important step of introducing
legislation, jurisprudence or military policies restricting, and
in some cases completely prohibiting, the military use of
schools or universities, although this injunction is not consistently enforced. Examples include Colombia, India, the
Philippines and, most recently, South Sudan, which in August
2013 issued a military order prohibiting its armed forces from
using schools for military purposes.
A positive step is the current effort, which the Global Coalition
to Protect Education from Attack (GCPEA) has galvanized, to
develop international guidelines – the Lucens Guidelines for
Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict. The intention is that when a state adopts the
Guidelines they will incorporate them into their domestic legislation and military doctrine, thereby making them binding via

EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

Partnerships for
monitoring and reporting
During the post-election crisis in Côte d’Ivoire from December 2010 to June
2011, dozens of schools were attacked. The education Cluster worked with
the Ministry of education to set up a national survey of 9,000 schools to
assess the impact of attacks on education nationally.
According to the Global education Cluster, the education ministry and
district education authorities encouraged the involvement of teachers in
every village to collect data for the survey by hand and by email. They
looked for information on schools being used for military purposes or as
shelters for internally displaced people, the destruction and looting of
schools, forced closure of schools due to threats of violence, incidents of
explosions and attacks on students.

Soldiers from the ‘Invisible
Commandos’ practice ambush
techniques at a middle school
serving as a base in the PK-18 area
of the Abobo neighbourhood in
Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire, 19 April 2011.
© 2011 AP Photo/Rebecca Blackwell

The survey found 477 schools had been destroyed, damaged or looted, or
used by armed and military groups: of these, 180 schools were looted, 173
destroyed, burned down or damaged and 20 schools were attacked by
bombs. The information was later used to press for an end to military use of
schools. By November 2011, armed groups had vacated 45 schools as a
result of negotiations, according to a GCPeA study.
25

SUMMARY

Police officer in front of a school pockmarked
with bullet holes, Pasto, Colombia, 2010.
© 2010 UNHCR Colombia

