



students in these schools that it is the duty of every Muslim to take back their land from the Buddhist infidels”.95 In 2009, the government estimated that 3,000 violent militants were terrorizing the 1.7 million people in the southern provinces.96Those under 18 are mostly given roles such as spying, arson and spray-painting “Free Patani” on roads.97At the same time, vigilante groups and rogue elements of the Thai security forces have been accused of targeting mosques and Muslim schools for revenge killings, which in turn may further fuel the cycle of violence and encourages enlistment of young Malays. The spike in attacks on schools in Thailand in June 2009 may have been triggered by the killing of 11 Muslims while they were praying in a mosque in Narathiwat on 9 June, suggesting the motive was revenge.The gender motive in attacks in Afghanistan and Pakistan is underlined by formal and written threats from the Taliban. When Fatema98, a former director of education in a province with 480 schools in Afghanistan, attended the launch of Education under Attack in New York in November 2007, she brought with her a handful of written death threats received by herself and other officials, headteachers and teachers. One demanded: “Close schools for girls… it is the Islamic duty not to continue with those schools”; others were vaguer about the motive: “I have a request that you stop doing this work… If you continue I will kidnap you, take you in a car and kill you”. This could have referred to the work of running girls’ schools or any schools. Similarly, 

95 ICG, “Recruiting Militants in Southern Thailand,” media release, June 22, 2009.96 Fleming, “Ethnic Violence Spreads in Thailand.”97 ICG, Recruiting Militants in Southern Thailand.98 Full name withheld for her protection.

Rohela, 13, left, and her sister, Sokhaila, 14, study in their house in Shomali Plain, Afghanistan, in 2006. The sisters used to attend the Nahare Balla School, funded by Save the Children, but gave up last August due to strong opposition from their oldest brother. There is no female teacher in the school, and some girls like these sisters have left the school because of the lack of separate classes and of female teachers. The sisters study twice a day for an hour each in their house.© Save the Children/ Jean Chung

