



up her job.146 Her story was told to journalist Hamid Mir by a religious teacher who tried to help her. When neighbours in the village of Kuzah Bandai warned her that women were prohibited from leaving the home without good reason, she said she could not let her children starve and relocated to her sister’s house in Mingora, where she continued working at a private school. When further complaints were made to her principal, she enlisted the help of a madrasa teacher who had taught members of the Taliban. He pleaded her case with the local commander, but was relieved from his post and banished from Swat for his efforts. The female teacher was then taken, forced to wear the ankle bells of a prostitute, and killed.147The plight of teachers and girl students was raised internationally by Koïchiro Matsuura, then Director-General of UNESCO. He expressed concern that attacks had been striking educational institutions, teaching staff and students for months. Girls’ schools had been particularly targeted, and the Taliban and the Army had set up military posts in school buildings. Only an agreement upholding the government’s commitment to Education for All, including facilitating girls’ access to education, would reassure parents. “A strong signal must be sent, so that everyone can once more benefit from education, which is a determining factor for their future and the future of the country,” he said.148By late April, the schools that had not been bombed had theoretically re-opened under the terms of the ceasefire agreement.149 But many teachers had fled the region and parents remained afraid to send their daughters to school, for fear they might be attacked.At this time, the Pakistani army, under pressure from the US and public opposition to its appeasement of the Taliban, and confronted by Taliban incursions in the districts neighbouring Swat, Dir and Buner, launched a full-scale offensive to drive Taliban insurgents out of Swat Valley.The fighting displaced up to two million people, but by late May, as the Army encircled Taliban strongholds, Taliban fighters remained encamped in schools and offices in Mingora.150The Army eventually won the war. The immediate cost to education of the Taliban uprising and subsequent fighting was the destruction or damaging of 356 schools. 

146 IRIN News, “Pakistan: Swat Militants Driving Girls Out of School.”147 Hamid Mir, “Swat – Valley of Horror and Terror,” The News, January 13, 2009.148 UNESCO, “Director-General Expresses Deep Concern About Girls’ Education in Swat Valley: ‘The Future of an Entire Country is Taken Hostage’,” April 1, 2009. 149 Declan Walsh, “Taliban Reaches Beyond Swat Valley in Pakistan,” The Guardian, April 25, 2009.150 Declan Walsh, “Pakistani Army Claims Taliban’s Elimination in Swat Valley Imminent,” The Guardian, May 22, 2009.

