
SUMMARY

Addressing education’s role in conflict
In the far south of Thailand, ethnic Malay Muslim insurgent groups have attacked schools
at least in part due to their perception that schools have in the past been used as a means
to impose Buddhism, Thai language and Thai versions of history on ethnic Malay
Muslims. Some 59 teachers were assassinated in 2009-2012.
The education authorities decided that protection against attacks on schools and assassinations of teachers could be increased by making changes to the curriculum and adopting
staffing policies that help build relations with the local community.
Major changes included increasing by five-fold the number of hours of Islamic religious
instruction and switching from a five-day to a six-day week to accommodate the extra
lessons; recruiting thousands of Malay Muslim teachers locally instead of relying on
bringing in Thai Buddhist teachers from outside the area, who are the main targets of
attack; and incorporating the teaching of english and the local Malay language.

EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

Education policy and planning
In countries at risk of conflict, addressing education-related
grievances can play an important part in reducing the risk of
attacks on schools, students and education personnel. Where
unequal access is a source of tension, education authorities
can address the problem by ensuring that there are fair criteria
for allocating resources. Where curricula are perceived to be
biased against one ethnic group because classes are taught in
an alien language or because alien cultural values, a different
religion or distorted history are being taught, curriculum
reform can reduce the potential motives for attack.
Strengthening education for peaceful resolution of conflicts,
respect for human rights and responsible citizenship in the
curriculum may also help reduce conflict and build peace.
In countries where attacks on education have taken place,
every year that passes without a school being rehabilitated
and reopened after an attack can mean a lost year of education
for its students. While conflict is ongoing, it is often too
dangerous to attempt to rebuild schools, but also when it ends,
governments frequently lack the funds or capacity to repair
and rehabilitate schools quickly, as has been the case in
Afghanistan and earlier in Sierra Leone, for instance. As a
result, it can take many years to overcome the impact of
attacks. Repair and rebuilding of education facilities may
therefore require sustained, large-scale collaboration with
international donors and NGOs to fill funding and capacity
gaps.

Protecting higher education

Thai Rangers stand guard at a school as they provide
security to students and teachers after the school’s head
teacher was killed by suspected separatist militants the
previous week in Thailand’s restive southern province of
Narathiwat, 17 December 2012.
© 2012 MADAREE TOHLALA/AFP/Getty Images

Protecting higher education can include some measures
similar to those used within primary and secondary schools,
such as using on-campus security guards or escorts and
strengthening gates, walls, fences and windows. But it can
also include other types of measures. Distance learning
programmes and scholarship schemes for studying, teaching
or researching abroad, for instance, have enabled education to
continue away from the source of threats. GCPEA’s recent
research examining the relationship between autonomy and
security concluded that enhancing university autonomy vis-àvis the state can also contribute to reducing the risk of attacks,
particularly where universities provide their own security
guards, by reducing the likelihood of confrontation between
students and the forces of the state and the likelihood of
arbitrary arrest over issues of academic freedom.

