
Afghanistan: Pupils at the Lycee Mahmud Tarzi, Kandahar in 2007.© UNESCO/Roya Aziz/Star Group




The Taliban had posted a note in the village mosque a few weeks earlier ordering all girls’ schools to close and a night letter left at a nearby school had warned: “Respected Afghans: Leave the culture and traditions of the Christians and Jews. Do not send your girls to school.” Otherwise, it said, the Mujahedin of the Islamic Emirates, the name of the former Taliban government, “will conduct their robust military operations in the daylight”.Girls’ education is not the only target. Anwar Alsaid, programme specialist at UNESCO Kabul, said that the reported motive for some attacks is a belief that the curriculum has been inﬂ uenced by the Western powers and will undermine the Afghan identity, even though the ministry consulted widely before drawing it up.Amnesty International has published details from a Taliban military rule book, which says: “Anyone who works as a teacher for the current puppet regime must receive a warning. If he [sic] nevertheless refuses to give up his job, he must be beaten. If the teacher continues to instruct contrary to the principles of Islam, the district commander or group leader must kill him.” It also says schools set up by NGOs under the current regime cannot be tolerated, and if they fail to heed warnings to close, must be burned.53Coursen-Neff is a co-author of the most comprehensive study on the situation, Lessons in Terror: Attacks on Education in Afghanistan,54 which reported that attacks on all aspects of the education process sharply increased in late 2005 and the ﬁ rst half of 2006. By the middle of 2006, attacks were averaging one school a day. Night letters were being left in homes, on roadsides en route to schools, and in mosques, threatening violence against individuals or communities, warning them against sending children, particularly girls, to school and against teaching. Human Rights Watch said physical attacks against schools and their staff hurt education directly and indirectly. They forced schools to close because of damage by 

53 Amnesty International, 19 April 2007, ‘Afghanistan: All who are not Friends, are Enemies; Taliban Abuses Against Civilians’54 Human Rights Watch (2006), Lessons in Terror: Attacks on Education in Afghanistan.

