



military act is intentional and disrupts education, to which every individual has a right, it is an attack on education, even if the motive cannot be clearly established.Attempting sophisticated categorization of attacks can reveal more difficulties. For instance, trying to establish the extent to which girls’ schools are being targeted compared with boys’ schools in Afghanistan involves finding out if the reported girls’ schools attacked really are girls’ schools. In some cases, they may educate girls and boys in separate shifts or together, or they may have become boys’ schools as girls have left. Similarly, some boys’ schools that are attacked may turn out to have girl students in them, which may have prompted the attack.61Challenges of data comparisonAccuracy of analysis is affected by different types of data being monitored by different agencies, which makes historical and international comparisons difficult. Governments often issue aggregate figures of the number of teachers killed or injured, but provide no breakdown of the types of attack they face or the gender of those attacked, which is important where, for instance, girls’ schools are being singled out for attack, as in Pakistan. Some add the number of death threats. Others include kidnapping or rape as a threat rather than a type of attack.Even within countries, organizations and ministries may provide different figures because they collect different sets of data or use different definitions and/or sources - or because they have different interests at heart.In Colombia, for example, teachers’ union FECODE, independent think-tank the National Trade Union School (ENS), the Observatory of Human Rights and International Humanitarian Law of the Vice-Presidency, and the Ministry of Foreign Relations all give different figures for the number of deaths. The latter says three “teachers” have been killed in the first half of 2009; ENS says eight “education workers” have been killed, but it only monitors deaths of unionized workers. The teachers’ union, FECODE, says nine teachers have been killed and the Observatory says ten teachers have been killed, including eight unionized and two non-unionized, which tallies with the ENS figure for deaths of unionized education workers.In Iraq, Ministry of Education figures conflict with figures from the Ministry of Human Rights. In Afghanistan, CARE found that figures from the Ministry of Education 

61 Zama Coursen-Neff, HRW, telephone interview with the author, August 31, 2009. Coursen-Neff is the author of HRW, Lessons in Terror: Attacks on Education in Afghanistan, HRW Reports 8, no. 6(C) (New York: HRW, 2006) and has made visits to Afghan schools.

