
example, through public ceremonies.243 Alternatively,
back-door negotiations may be more appropriate
where discussion with certain parties to the conflict
would present a risk for negotiators. For example, in
Nepal, secret negotiations took place with Maoist
rebels so that individuals – mostly women – involved
in discussions on the subject of Schools as Zones of
Peace would not be put in jeopardy.244

Codes of Conduct/Zones of Peace
Codes of Conduct are a particular type of negotiation
that can be long-term and prevent school attacks.
‘Schools as Zones of Peace’ (SZOP) have been established in many areas and international organizations
can play a major role in encouraging communities to
engage in such a process. A mid-term evaluation by
Save the Children noted 12 of 16 of their project
schools in Nepal had Codes of Conduct regarding
SZoP.245
UN agencies and NGOs promoting SZOPs have often
found it beneficial to work through local partners,
whose staff speak local languages and understand the
context, enabling long-term relationship-building,
meaningful participation from all stakeholders,
including schools and their communities, and
contextual relevance.246 The negotiation process may
be lengthy and requires patience, flexibility and trust.
In Baglung, Nepal, for example, Maoists initially
rejected a declaration of the school as a SZOP, but
allowed it as they became more integrated into the
community.247
Additionally, including clauses that target all participants’ behaviour – not just armed groups and forces –
has been effective in places like Nepal. There, clauses
covered concerns such as armed activities and
weapons in school; use of children in political activities; abduction; use of inappropriate language; and
use of alcohol and tobacco.248

Adaptation of education delivery
Schools may be targets for attack because they are
large physical structures, are a source for human
resources or have symbolic meaning. Consequently,
changes in physical set-up or content may be
protective; for example, reducing visibility by means of
boundary walls, relocating schools or holding classes

EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

in homes or community premises, or changing
curriculum, staffing or teaching. However, these
changes must be made with an awareness of how they
might adversely affect education quality.249

Guards/security
Armed or unarmed guards may provide security,
reduce the risk of attack or enable rapid response to
attack. Because government provision of security can
attract attacks in some cases, community guards may
be a logical alternative. In Liberia, the community
viewed unarmed guards as a relatively cost-effective
and sustainable protection mechanism that helped
teachers and students feel safe.250 However,
depending on the context, having community guards
may simply transfer the risk.

Protest
Community protests against attacks on education
have occurred in several countries including Pakistan,
Yemen and India. For example, in India, students and
teachers in Jharkhand organized a protest after
Maoists blew up a school in 2011.251 While protests
draw attention to threats to education, they can
present considerable risks for communities,
subjecting them to further violence. External actors,
therefore, should not initiate community protest
though they can support wider awareness of the
issues being raised.

Response actions
Promoting continuity of education provision
Because of their immediate proximity, communities
can be first responders for restoring access to
education and mitigating the impact of attacks, for
example, by repairing damaged buildings. NGOs may
also engage community members in the process of
fundraising, and provision of materials and labour to
rebuild. Save the Children’s global programme for
education in conflict-affected states included the
mobilization of communities in locations such as
Angola, Côte d’Ivoire, DRC, Iraq and Nepal to repair
damaged school buildings or build new structures,
leading to increased access to education.252 Doing so
may instil a sense of community ownership of the
school, further protecting education. However,

standards need to be in place to ensure that buildings
constructed are safe.
In situations where schools are attacked, communities may also establish temporary learning spaces.
In the Central African Republic (CAR), amid ongoing
violence and insecurity, communities set up ‘bush
schools’253 in makeshift shelters or under trees to
continue education when fighting forced them to flee.
Teachers received training and then worked for in-kind
payment from the community.254
With temporary learning spaces or non-formal
education sites, it is vital to ensure that children’s
learning and qualifications are recognized in order to
facilitate integration into formal education or
vocational training.255 This requires that the stakeholders, including international organizations that are
often involved, advocate with the Ministry of
Education and other key decision-making bodies to
recognize adapted forms of schooling. Although CAR’s
bush schools were initially intended to be temporary,
the Ministry of Education eventually recognized them,
which allowed for students’ and teachers’ future
success in formal education.256

Monitoring and reporting mechanisms
School management committees, parent teacher
associations, community groups and children’s clubs
can monitor and report cases of attack, facilitating
analysis that informs prevention and response
actions, supports advocacy and increases accountability.
Communities, schools and governments can set up
independent monitoring systems. They can also
contribute alerts to the UN Monitoring and Reporting
Mechanism on children and armed conflict (MRM),
which records grave violations of children’s rights in
certain conflict-affected countries. Ideally, local organizations should be involved in monitoring from the
outset to ensure that data collection is sensitive to
protection issues. In parts of eastern DRC, focal points
from school management committees and parent
teacher associations report violations of children’s
rights and children’s clubs are encouraged to participate.257 In the Philippines, it was found that the
creation and ongoing presence of a volunteer-run
community monitoring group (not initially linked with

