



Currently, the ICC’s Office of the Prosecutor is conducting detailed analysis of the situations in Afghanistan, Colombia, Kenya, Georgia, Côte d’Ivoire and Palestine.Making an example of education attackersThere is general recognition that for protection of education in law to have an impact, more must be done to ensure that the perpetrators of violations are seen to pay for their crimes. At the UNGA debate in March 2009, Lothar Krappman, a member of the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, said: “This vast demolition of education facilities is not only a side effect of blind military action. Let me ask whether attacks on schools, teachers and children really get the attention these crimes deserve? I would like to urge all those involved, including UN bodies and agencies as well as civil society organizations, to consider issuing a clear statement, which calls upon state parties to protect schools and to make them a secure place. States should criminalize attacks on schools as war crimes in accordance with article 8(2)(b)(ix) of the Rome Statute of the ICC and prosecute offenders accordingly”.A useful objective for those concerned with attacks on education might be to encourage national or international investigations in the most high-profile situations where attacks on schools and teachers are well publicized and the perpetrators have made their intention to attack schools public in published threats or orders. Examples include the targeting of schools in Afghanistan and Pakistan by the Taliban, and in India by the Communist Party of India-Maoist. In Afghanistan, there are numerous cases of written threats, some of them in the name of Taliban leader Mullah Omar and many in the name of the Taliban. In Pakistan, the threat to girls’ schools to either close down or face the consequences was made very publicly on behalf of local Taliban leader Maulana Fazlullah and was later reviewed and modified at a meeting chaired by him to apply to schools teaching girls above grade 4.313 In India, the Naxalites have made public statements, particularly in Chhattisgarh State, indicating that they have blown up school buildings in retaliation for security forces previously using them as camps. In many cases, they have blown up schools long after they were no longer being used as camps. The scale of attacks in Pakistan and Afghanistan and the deterrent message it would send because those conflicts - and attacks on education in those conflicts - are more 

313 Delawar Jan, “400 Private Schools in Swat Shut Down Girls’ Classes,” The News, January 16, 2009.

