
• The guidelines should reflect good practice
already applied by some parties to armed
conflict.
• The guidelines should be produced for the use
of all parties to armed conflict, both states and
armed non-state actors.
• While the guidelines should be produced
specifically for application during armed
conflict, they should also be useful and
instructive for post-conflict and other comparable situations, including those with the
potential to turn into armed conflict.
An initial draft set of guidelines was discussed by
representatives of a number of states from regions
around the world, as well as UN organizations and
NGOs, at a workshop in Lucens, Switzerland, in late
2012. All those who attended were invited on the
understanding that their identities would not be
disclosed and their input would not be directly
attributed to the states and organizations they represented. The states included a cross-section of the
international community, ranging from NATO members
to developing states that had experienced, or were
still experiencing, armed conflicts within their
borders.

Content of the Draft Lucens Guidelines
Further drafts and discussions resulted in Draft
Guidelines published in July 2013.391 They remain in
draft form and may be amended slightly before being
finalised (at some point in 2014). There are six guidelines, as follows:
Preamble: Parties to armed conflict are urged not to
use schools and universities for any purpose in
support of the military effort. While it is acknowledged
that certain uses would not be contrary to the law of
armed conflict, all parties should endeavour to avoid
impinging on students’ safety and education, using
the following as a guide to responsible practice:
Guideline 1: Functioning schools and universities
should not be used by the fighting forces of parties to
armed conflict in any way in support of the military
effort, either for immediate tactical advantage or for
longer term purposes.

EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

(a)

This principle extends to schools and universities that are temporarily closed outside
normal class hours, during weekends and
holidays, and during vacation periods.

or abandoned – are ordinarily civilian objects. They
must never be destroyed as a measure intended to
deprive the opposing parties to the armed conflict of
the ability to use them in the future.

(b)

Parties to armed conflict should neither use
force nor offer incentives to education administrators to evacuate schools and universities in
order that they can be made available for use in
support of the military effort.

Guideline 4: Use of a school or university by the
fighting forces of parties to armed conflict in support
of the military effort may have the effect of turning it
into a military objective subject to attack. Parties to
armed conflict should consider all feasible alternative
measures before attacking a school or university that
has become a military objective, including warning the
enemy in advance that an attack will be forthcoming
unless it does not cease its use.

Guideline 2: Abandoned schools and universities
should not be used by the fighting forces of parties to
armed conflict for any purpose in support of the
military effort except when, and only for as long as, no
choice is possible between such use of the school or
university and another feasible method for obtaining a
similar military advantage. Appropriate alternative
premises should be presumed to be a better option,
even if they are not as convenient or as well positioned
for the desired military purpose, although all feasible
precautions should be taken to protect all civilian
objects from attack. The fighting forces of parties to
armed conflict should be mindful that they may not
have full knowledge of the potential negative consequences of their use of a school, including its effect on
a civilian population’s willingness to return to an area.
(a)

Any such use should be for the minimum time
necessary.

(b)

Abandoned schools and universities that are
used by the fighting forces of parties to armed
conflict in support of the military effort should
always remain available to allow educational
authorities to re-open them as soon as practicable, provided this would not risk endangering
the security of students and staff.

(c)

Any evidence or indication of militarization or
fortification should be completely removed
following the withdrawal of fighting forces, and
any damage caused to the infrastructure of the
institution should be promptly and fully
repaired. All munitions and unexploded
ordnance or remnants of war must be cleared
from the site.

Guideline 3: Schools and universities – be they in
session, closed for the day or for holidays, evacuated,

(a)

Prior to any attack on a school that has become
a military objective, the parties to armed
conflict should take into consideration the duty
of special care for children, and the potential
long-term negative effect on a community’s
access to education posed by the damage or
destruction of the school.

(b)

The use of a school or university by the fighting
forces of one party to a conflict in support of the
military effort should not serve as justification
for an opposing party that captures it to
continue to use it in support of the military
effort. As soon as feasible, any evidence or
indication of militarization or fortification
should be removed and the facility returned to
civilian authorities for the purpose of its educational function.

Guideline 5: The fighting forces of parties to armed
conflict should generally not be employed on security
tasks related to schools and universities except when
the risk to those institutions is assessed as high; if
alternative means of reducing the likelihood of attack
are not feasible; if evacuation from the high risk area is
not feasible; and if there are no alternative appropriately trained civilian personnel available to provide
security.
(a)

If such fighting forces are engaged in security
tasks related to schools and universities, their
presence within the grounds or buildings of the
school should be avoided if at all possible, to
avoid compromising its civilian status and
disrupting the learning environment.

