



emerged in the last three months of 2008, would intensify. Such a trend could affect teachers in their security details, which tend to be blown up by roadside bombs or car bombs.219The measures for protecting schools always have to be looked at in the context of general security measures taken to tackle the wider conflict in which they occur. In 2007, the post-coup government in Thailand stepped up military spending and deployed more security forces in a tougher approach to the insurgency. This included the detention of hundreds of suspects for up to a month at a time, during which they were reportedly forced to go through “re-education” programmes.But the International Crisis Group (ICG) warned that the government’s use of irregular forces such as paramilitary rangers and volunteer militias had weakened command-and-control mechanisms, reducing accountability. According to ICG, there was a need to professionalize the forces in the area. There was also a need to crack down on vigilante groups, which may have been behind the increasing number of reported murders of Malay Muslim teachers and other civilians in revenge attacks.“Sub-contracting security to poorly trained paramilitaries and militias is no solution,” said ICG analyst Francesca Lawe-Davies. “They often fail to provide security, and their involvement in human rights abuses hands militants a propaganda victory”.220The rangers should be given additional military and humanitarian law training and closer supervision to improve discipline and curb abuses; the village militias should be disarmed and disbanded; and controls on guns and gun licences should be tightened. Vigilante groups should not be allowed to operate, Lawe-Davies argued.221In March 2009, Thai premier Abhisit Vejjajiva ruled out granting political autonomy to the region and announced that an extra 4,000 security personnel would be deployed, adding to more than 60,000 forces already mobilized against the activities of an estimated 7,000 insurgents.222 The troops would prevent local teenagers from joining the militant group by providing them with more opportunities for education, one report said.223But attacks on teachers and teacher escorts appeared to be increasing in the first half of 2009. Pusak warned in January 2009 that there was no guarantee that such 

219 Ron Corben, “Thailand’s Southern Insurgency Passes Five-Year Mark,” Voice of America, January 5, 2009.220 International Crisis Group (ICG), Southern Thailand: The Problem with Paramilitaries, Asia Report no. 140 (October 23, 2007).221 Ibid.222 Grant Peck, “Thai Muslim Insurgents Draw Recruits from Schools,” AP, June 22, 2009.223 Xinhua, “Security Force Attacked by Suspected Militant Bomb in S. Thailand,” March 12, 2009.

