



measures would make a long-term impact while the roots of the conflict, the sense of alienation among Malay Muslims, were not addressed.224 Compromises on the type of education offered, by contrast, could play an important part in doing so.The question that needs to be researched in Thailand is whether or not providing soldiers as escorts, while well intentioned, simply offers a bigger target for the insurgents to aim at and encourages more attacks. In other conflicts, such as the Naxalite wars in India, schools have been relocated near or at police stations to provide extra protection, but this has made them vulnerable to attacks on the police stations. Community defenceIn many countries, particularly those with poor communications and thinly spread rural populations in challenging terrain, stationing troops or police at schools may not be a viable option due to the cost, manpower and logistical support required. Two initiatives in Afghanistan have shed new light on alternative ways to defend schools.The first is the community defence initiative launched in June 2006, which involves mobilizing local communities to deter or resist attacks. School protection shura (councils) were established, where school management committees did not exist. They were to be supported by a national information gathering system to provide early warning of attacks. A team of 85 child protection officers were to monitor security data and work with local reconstruction teams to improve security. In addition, local people were encouraged to confront attackers, and in cases in at least eight provinces, they rushed out to defend schools.The CARE study, Knowledge on Fire, revealed discrepancies in the perceived impact of this scheme. On the negative side, 87 per cent of respondents said that no attacks had been prevented in their community, while only four per cent cited cases of prevention. But in two provinces, Balkh and Khost, 12 per cent said there had been cases of prevention.225In those two provinces, several respondents mentioned cases in which communities had negotiated with potential attackers or gained “permission” to continue teaching. In Herat in western Afghanistan, for instance, a police officer recounted how the police and community collaborated in the aftermath of an attack. The community 

224 Corben, “Thailand’s Southern Insurgency Passes Five-Year Mark.”225 Marit Glad, Knowledge on Fire: Attacks on Education in Afghanistan; Risks and Measures for Successful Mitigation (CARE/World Bank/Afghan Ministry of Education, 2009), 49.

