
EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

International and national legal protections
Notwithstanding the existence of a strong framework of international law in favour of the right to education and
the protection of education, the number of attacks on education and the impunity of most perpetrators indicate
that much remains to be done to further strengthen legal protections and accountability mechanisms at international and national levels.
• All parties to armed conflicts should abide by the laws of war and never intentionally direct attacks
against civilians – such as students, teachers or other education personnel – who are not taking direct
part in hostilities. Nor should they intentionally direct attacks against buildings dedicated to education –
such as schools and universities – provided they are not military objectives.
• Government officials and leaders of armed non-state groups should make clear public statements that
attacks on education are prohibited, issue clear orders to this effect and refrain from using education
institutions for military purposes.
• States should ensure that their domestic law criminalizes all elements of attacks on education in line
with international humanitarian and human rights law.
• Where they have not done so, states should ratify the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, which protects the right to education at all levels.
• Relevant UN treaty-based human rights bodies and other international and regional monitoring and
supervisory bodies should offer coherent and coordinated guidance to states (and, where relevant, nonstate actors) on the measures required to implement their obligations under international law with
respect to attacks on education. States and armed non-state groups should, in turn, implement these
bodies’ recommendations.
• All parties to peace agreements and mediators should ensure that issues concerning attacks on
education be included in any post-conflict agreement and that international legal protections for
education are explicitly articulated.

Military use of schools and universities
The use of schools and universities for military purposes during armed conflict can displace students and
deprive them of an education, create a wholly inappropriate learning environment, or even place students,
teachers and academics – and schools and universities – at risk of attack.
• All parties to armed conflict should refrain from using schools and universities for any purpose in support
of the military effort. While certain uses may not be contrary to the laws of war, all parties should
endeavour to avoid impinging on students’ safety and education.
• To this end, states, as well as UN and regional peacekeepers, should support and endorse the Lucens
Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict and incorporate them into military doctrine, military manuals, rules of engagement, operational orders and other
means of dissemination, as far as possible, to encourage appropriate practice throughout the chain of
command.

