



committees are being created where school management committees do not exist. They will be supported by the establishment of a national system for gathering information on security-related incidents, co-ordinated by the Ministry of Education, in which provincial ofﬁ cials call in about incidents twice a day via a 24-hour-a-day communications system. Protection advisers in each province will monitor and analyse security data. They work with local reconstruction teams, which are supported by the military and local leaders to improve security. In addition, mobile protection teams will work with child protection ofﬁ cers, government and local communities to devise protection strategies for children, particularly girls, and female teachers, and to monitor mine-awareness guidelines. UNICEF’s school incident database is showing a sharp drop in school attacks in Afghanistan over the six months prior to March 2007, with daily reports of incidents received by the Ministry of Education down by 60 per cent. It is not possible to say whether this is due to the work of school protection committees, which is in its early stages. Local people, however, have rushed out to defend their schools when insurgents tried to set them ablaze. This has happened in the provinces of Kabul, Kunduz, Ghazni, Baghlan, Saripul, Takhar, Zabul, Nuristan, and Logar. For instance, in Puli Alam District, Logar province, on 2 October 2006, villagers ran out to confront ten extremists who were trying to set ﬁ re to the Kamail Girls’ School in Hesarek village. By the time the Afghan National Police arrived, the attackers had ﬂ ed.Other ways in which communities take responsibility for protection have worked elsewhere. In Iraq, Human Rights Watch found that in June 2003 school attendance in Baghdad increased as families began arranging for their daughters to travel to and from school in groups and more male relatives escorted girls to school.  Promoting resilienceA third approach is to reduce risk to students and staff by removing them from, or reducing the time they spend in, traditional places of learning. Schools and universities are often comprised of large buildings in prominent places in a town or village that are easy targets for shelling.The Iraqi Ministry of Higher Education has told university researchers that they may come in just twice a week and work from home the rest of the time to reduce the risk of being subjected to attack. UNESCO is helping the government explore how distance learning by television and radio could be used to allow students to study at home. However, according to Mohamed Djelid, Director of UNESCO Iraq, much 

