



have fuelled tension. It does not help if schools divide children, with parallel systems, by religion or ethnicity. To end attacks on education, a concerted effort must be made to end education’s role in promoting conﬂ ict and to make it part of the solution to the problem. Force and political dialogue alone will not make the underlying issues go away.Currently the Afghan government is working with local religious leaders – who as the only educated people in many communities are the best placed to advocate – to promote girls’ education based on the principles of Islam and to mobilize the community to protect schoolchildren and teachers. “According to Islamic guidance, education is a must both for males and females. Religious leaders are well trained in this thought and they are to advocate for both,” says David McLouglin,97 head of education at UNICEF Kabul. In Thailand, UNESCO is working with the government to explore ways to bring in use of the local language, Yawi, in initial literacy instruction in the three southernmost provinces. “There is a wider sense of dissatisfaction, beyond separatism, and part of that is lack of sensitivity by the government to local speciﬁ city in the region – the culture, language and history background,” says Sheldon Shaeffer. Compromises made in the language and content of education, involving government schools teaching in the local language and teaching Islamic moral or religious instruction, and Islamic schools teaching the national secular curriculum history and Thai language in addition to religious instruction, as happens in Malay schools, could ease the perception of schools as legitimate targets. Education is now accepted as a necessary part of the initial response to an emergency created by conﬂ ict. The challenge now is to make education part of the solution to conﬂ icts. A useful international blueprint for the type of education that could serve as a model has existed for more than 40 years, in the form of the Recommendation concerning the Status of Teachers.The Recommendation declared that education should inculcate “a deep respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms” and that “the utmost importance should be attached to the contribution to be made by education to peace and to understanding, tolerance and friendship among all nations and among racial or religious groups”98. Its guiding principles were written at the height of the Cold War, in a different world order, but their relevance is clear in the conﬂ icts that have emerged since the collapse of the Soviet Union. The drawing back of the Iron Curtain 

97 Notes to Brendan O’Malley from David Mcloughlin, January-March 2007.98 Recommendation concerning the Status of Teachers, para. 3, 1966.

