
SUMMARY

Recruitment of children and sexual
violence at schools or along school routes
This study addresses child recruitment and sexual violence
only to the extent that such abuses happened at schools or
along school routes. Armed groups and armed forces
sometimes specifically target such locations because they
know they will find children there.
Reported evidence of armed groups and armed criminal groups
recruiting children while they were in school or as they travelled
to or from school was found in six countries during 2009-2012:
Colombia, DRC, Pakistan, Somalia, Thailand and Yemen.
Recruitment happened for a variety of reasons. In Colombia, for
example, child recruits were used by armed groups as spies or
to transport arms or pass on messages to other students in
schools, as well as to run their drug business inside schools. In
Pakistan, militants recruited, lured or abducted children from
mainstream schools and madrassas (religious schools), in
some cases to train as suicide bombers.
Recruitment methods included indoctrination programmes at
school, threatening to kill students if they did not join,
abduction en route to schools and rounding up students at

schools. In Colombia, armed groups waited outside schools to
talk to children, find out information, and recruit and control
them; in Yemen, Houthi rebels used students and teachers to
recruit children; and in DRC, a breakaway rebel group
abducted children en masse from school to fill their ranks.
The strongest evidence of systematic recruitment from schools
was found in Somalia, where the UN reported that Al-Shabaab
abducted 2,000 children for military training in 2010 and
recruited another 948 in 2011, mostly from schools. Human
Rights Watch reported cases of Al-Shabaab abducting girls
from schools for forced marriage to fighters. In one case,
militants beheaded a 16-year-old who refused to marry a
commander much older than her and brought her head back to
be shown to the remaining girls at the school as a warning.
There were also isolated reports of sexual violence by armed
forces or armed groups at or en route to or from schools in DRC
and Somalia in 2009-2012. Two incidents in CAR and India
were also reported in 2012-2013. These types of attacks may be
more widespread, but public reporting of sexual violence is
often very limited and, when it does occur, tends to lack information about whether the violence took place en route to or
from or at school.

Children seized at school
According to Human Rights Watch, in April 2012 in DRC, followers of the rebel
general Bosco Ntaganda, formerly of the Congolese Army, raided Mapendano
secondary school in North Kivu province and seized 32 male students. It was one of
their methods of forcibly recruiting school students when villagers refused to hand
over their sons. A 17-year-old student told Human Rights Watch that fighters entered
his school at the end of classes, took them outside, tied up their hands and marched
the students off the premises to join the forces fighting for Ntaganda. At a military
camp, they were given some training. Recruits who resisted were beaten and others
were told they would be killed if they tried to escape. In one case, a 16-year-old
recruit told Human Rights Watch that at night Ntaganda’s men ‘put grenades on us
and told us that if we moved, they would explode’. Back in the villages, fear of
recruitment led many boys and young men to flee across the border into Rwanda.

