
SUMMARY

Response and prevention
So what can be done to stop attacks on education and how can
their impact be limited? Although more information has been
gathered on prevention and response since the last Education
under Attack study was published in 2010, rigorous empirical
and comparative research into the effectiveness of different
measures is still lacking, in part due to the major methodological challenges of conducting such research. A clearer
understanding is still needed of exactly what the relative
advantages of one intervention over another are, given the
nature of attacks, their perpetrators and motives; the
particular context; and the potential negative side effects and
unintended consequences. Nevertheless, there are examples
of measures that have been taken to respond to and prevent
attacks, both before and during this study’s reporting period,
by international agencies, national governments, NGOs and
communities.

Monitoring and reporting
Effective monitoring, assessment and reporting are crucial for
ensuring that governments, UN agencies and NGOs take
appropriate prevention and response measures. One of the
most significant developments during the reporting period
was the passing of UN Security Council Resolution 1998 in July
2011, which made attacks on schools and school personnel a
trigger for listing in the annexes to the UN Secretary-General’s
annual report on children and armed conflict. This, in turn,
requires the violating parties to develop action plans to end
such attacks or face consequences that can include targeted
sanctions applied by the UN Security Council.
The passing of Resolution 1998 has ensured that the UN pays
greater attention to attacks on schools and teachers in
monitoring and reporting carried out by Country Task Forces of
the UN-led Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism (MRM) on
grave violations against children in situations of armed
conflict. However, so far the MRM has operated in a limited
number of countries – typically around 13-14 in any given year.
It did operate in many of the very heavily or heavily affected
countries, but it did not operate in all of them, or in a number of
other profiled countries in which a significant pattern of
attacks on education took place. This was partly because the
activation of the MRM requires a high standard of UN verification of incidents and identification of perpetrators.
Moreover, its remit only allows it to operate in situations of
armed conflict and a number of countries with a significant

