
The study does not count general collateral damage as
an attack on education, except regarding incidents in
the vicinity of education buildings and facilities where
the likely effect of intentional violence is harm to
students, education personnel or facilities. For
instance, if a bomb is detonated alongside a school
with the intention of harming a passing military patrol
and the school is damaged or students are killed, that
would be counted.
Moreover, the study does not include one-off, nonpolitically motivated violence by students or
individual adults, such as the killing of 20 children
and six staff members at Sandy Hook Elementary
School by a lone gunman in Newtown, Connecticut,
United States on 14 December 2012. Such incidents,
while devastating, are not addressed by this study
because they are not carried out by armed groups or
armed forces, or individuals associated with them, for
ideological, political, military, religious or sectarian
motives.
Targets of attack
Victims may include students, teachers, academics
and all other education personnel, including support
and transport staff (e.g. janitors, bus drivers, building
contractors); education officials (local and national);
education trade unionists; and education aid workers.
‘Personnel’ includes anyone working to support
education, paid or unpaid, short-term or long-term.
Other targets include education structures and
buildings (e.g. temporary learning spaces, schools,
colleges, universities, district education offices,
education ministry offices, temporary and permanent
examination halls, educational printers’ and
publishers’ offices, warehouses or printing works),
education resources, materials and facilities, and
transport and supply vehicles. Targets also include
education-related occasions or special events which
may or may not take place in a recognized education
building, such as graduation ceremonies;
school/university festivals or celebrations; education
conferences; or education protests, sit-ins and
demonstrations. These may have special symbolic
importance and put high numbers at risk.

EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

Motives

Students

Although the study focuses on deliberate attacks
against students, education personnel and facilities,
the inclusion of incidents among the data presented
in the study is not dependent on establishing motive,
since this is difficult to prove in many cases through
simple data collection unless there are published or
publicly broadcasted orders or threats. Instead, data
collection has focused on the type of target and effect
or likely effect. However, motives have been included
in the analysis when they are sufficiently clear or could
be reasonably inferred from the data.

‘Student’ refers to anyone being taught or studying at
any level, from kindergarten to university, or in adult
learning, in both formal and non-formal programmes.

Perpetrators

Although all countries where known attacks have been
committed during the reporting period are included in
the study, only those countries in which a minimum
threshold of attacks has been documented are
analysed in depth in the Country profiles section of the
study. The threshold is an approximate measure,
referring to countries where at least five incidents have
taken place or five people have been harmed, and
where either at least one of those incidents is a direct
attack on a school or university or at least one student,
teacher or academic has been killed from 2009 to
2013.

The types of perpetrator covered by the study include
armed forces (including international armed forces),
police forces, intelligence services, paramilitaries and
militias acting on behalf of the state, and armed nonstate groups, including rebel forces or any other armed
military, ethnic, political, religious or sectarian group.
Perpetrators may also include violent mobs that are
not organized as an armed group but are animated by
similar motives. Although the study does not generally
include attacks of a criminal nature, it does look at the
phenomenon of attacks by armed organized criminal
groups, including drug cartels, and the impact of
related security operations in those situations where
violence is widespread and there is a pattern of
attacking education targets. These are included where
the criminal organizations operate on a scale comparable to some armed groups, using military grade
weapons, seeking to control or dominate areas of
territory, perhaps provoking a military response, or
extending their violence beyond pure criminality to
include political targets.
Schools
For the purposes of this study, ‘school’ is often used as
shorthand for a recognizable education facility or
place of learning. In other places, the short form
‘schools and universities’ is used to refer to the whole
gamut of early learning centres, schools, colleges and
universities.

Criteria for including country profiles
A significant number of attacks on education occur in
countries where there is conflict. But incidents,
notably those targeting higher education, also occur
in countries not affected by conflict, particularly those
where fundamental freedoms are restricted.
Therefore, the focus of the study is not restricted to
situations of armed conflict.

Criteria for categorizing intensity of attacks
Where the study uses aggregate figures for the period
2009-2012, including in the maps, it does so because
these are the years for which data have been collected
systematically, whereas for 2013 only data for key
incidents up to September have been collected.
Use of education data
The statistical information on enrolment and literacy
rates in profiled countries should be treated with
caution, especially in the case of those countries that
have experienced considerable disruption due to
armed conflict, insecurity or instability. Though
formally correct, such statistical data may contain
outdated information and may not capture with full
accuracy the actual educational situation of a country
or of a particular area where attacks are occurring
within a country.

