



forces, are transformed into torture chambers and concentration camps and there is no hope that they will once again be used as schools in the near future…. Education of the adivasis [tribal communities] is not affected by destruction of school buildings used by the security forces but by the destruction of entire villages (up to 900 villages had been uprooted since June 2005) by the state police, paramilitary forces and Salwa Judum goondas [gangs] with active police support.108Motives for attacking higher educationThe Scholar Rescue Fund’s survey109 of 847 applicants and 140 recipients of rescue grants for persecuted scholars has provided perhaps the first detailed global analysis of the motives behind attacks on higher education, although only drawing on information from applicants for its own funds. The study covers a range of threats – from harassment and dismissal to violent attacks, arbitrary arrest, torture and assassination.It divides motives for persecuting academics into four groups. These are: 1. Political activities such as rejecting academic politicization, being involved with an opposition party, advocating political reform or the threat of attack by parties to conflict.2. Studying or exposing crimes by government or other actors; engagement with foreign entities, for instance, via presenting papers abroad or that will be read abroad; and involvement in human rights activities inside or outside their country.3. Religious or ethnic identity or gender, including being targeted for one’s origins, or for research about minority groups or religion.

108 Ganapathi, “Maoist Reply to the Independent Citizen Initiative on Dantewada,” October 10, 2006, http://www.cgnet.in/N1/maoistreplytoici/view?searchterm=reply (accessed February 20, 2008), para. 5, as reproduced in HRW, “Being Neutral is Our Biggest Crime”: Government, Vigilante, and Naxalite Abuses in India’s Chhattisgarh State (New York: HRW, 2008).109 Henry G. Jarecki and Daniela Zane Kaisth, Scholar Rescue in the Modern World (New York: Institute of International Education, 2009).

