



After leaving court, Mengistu and Ayalew were prevented from returning to work. Their school directors asked them to provide written justification for their absences during their detention and trial, but the police in Addis Ababa refused to produce the necessary documents.414Getenet, who almost died of his injuries, suffered severe health problems, among them lung deficiencies, which made speech difficult and forced him to give up teaching.415Mengistu, chairman of ETA’s East Gojam branch and a member of ETA’s committee for implementing the Education International/ETA Education for All/HIV-AIDS programme, and Getenet, a member of ETA’s Addis Ababa regional council, were rearrested in May 2007. On 28 May, when Ayalew heard that he, too, was due to be arrested, he fled into hiding. His wife was arrested in an attempt to pressure her to reveal his whereabouts, but was later released. 416 ETA leader Waldie Dana was arrested in early June. All four teachers were charged with belonging to the EPDF. In August, Dana’s wife, Wibit Legamo, and another ETA member, Berrbanu Aba-Debissa, were arrested. At the end of 2007, only Mengistu remained in detention. Four of the other five had been released, but there was no news of Ayalew.417Also in August 2007, police stormed a meeting of the Addis Ababa branch of ETA and arrested the General Secretary, Tesfaye Tirga, after finding Education International postcards calling for the release of the ETA activists. He was interrogated and beaten before being released.418In 2009, Meqcha Mengistu and Wibit Legamo were sentenced to three years’ and one year’s detention respectively on unsubstantiated charges of subversion.419

414 New Zealand Educational Institute, “Teacher Unionists Released from Prison,” NZEI Rourou 19, no. 3 (April 19, 2007), 4.415 Leeuwen, “Arrests of Ethiopian Teachers’ Association Activists Resumed.”416 Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, “Ongoing Arbitrary Detention of Five Leaders of the Ethiopian Teachers’ Association,” October 23. 2007, http://www.fidh.org/Ongoing-arbitrary-detention-of-five-leaders-of.417 ITUC, 2007 Annual Survey of Violations of Trade Union Rights.418 Ibid.419 Leeuwen, “Refusal to Register EI’s Member Organisation in Ethiopia.”

