



surrounding the attack? Is it just after a meeting of trade union officials or is it in the school?”286The case needs to be made for the inclusion of teacher trade unionists because they are often an important part of ensuring the provision of good-quality education both at primary level in line with the Education for All goals and at all other levels of education.Jan Eastman, of Education International, says the first point to make is that teacher trade unionists are both teachers and trade unionists, so their deaths still mean the loss of a teacher. Teachers are the most important and expensive resource in the education process. Schools can exist without buildings - 60 per cent of schools in Afghanistan do not have permanent buildings and operate in the open air or tents287 - but they cannot function without teachers. If teachers stop going to work due to death, injury or fear, children will not be taught.288Her second point is that teachers have a vital contribution to make through their trade unions in taking part in national dialogues shaping the education system, its curriculum, standards and values. Attacks on teacher trade unionists while carrying out that activity are an attack on the education system. Even debate about teachers’ pay is important, since the level set will affect recruitment and consequently the quality of staff. Giving teachers a voice through union membership and activities is an important part of developing a high-quality education system; attacking teacher trade unionists therefore potentially threatens the quality of education provided.Academics and higher education personnel Tertiary education is not covered by the OSRSG-CAAC because the remit of the MRM concerns children under 18. Although it is possible to argue that universities are fundamental to the training and qualification of future schoolteachers in both their subject and in pedagogy, the protection of academics is not on the Security Council’s agenda – perhaps because there is little awareness of the extent of the problem or its significance. There is the additional concern of the political sensitivity of the subject, given that most attacks on higher education appear to be carried out by forces of the state. Detailed studies reporting incidents, who is responsible, and why would be required to demonstrate that academics are a vulnerable population. 

286 Alec Wargo, interview with the author, October 8, 2009.287 Maysam Najafizada, “Afghanistan: Education in a War Zone,” Transitions Online with support from the Education Support Program, Open Society Institute, February 13, 2009.288 Jan Eastman, interview with the author, August 27, 2009.

