
PART I — GLOBAL OveRvIeW

Recommendations
The evidence is incontrovertible: attacking schools, universities, students, teachers and academics is a
common tactic in situations of conflict and insecurity around the world. While some progress has been made,
much more can and should be done to protect education from attack.

Monitoring, assessment and reporting
Monitoring, assessment and reporting of attacks on education are essential for many purposes, including
holding those responsible to account, devising effective ways to respond to and prevent attacks, and
addressing their impact.
• Ministries of education, interior and other relevant parts of government should rigorously monitor and
investigate attacks against students, schools and universities, teachers, academics and other education
personnel and the impact of such attacks, and should use that information to devise effective, coordinated responses. International agencies such as the Education and Child Protection clusters, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), UNICEF, UNESCO and donor governments should
support or continue to support these efforts, involving local NGOs in the monitoring process where
possible.
• UN human rights monitoring mechanisms, including the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights; the Human Rights Committee; the Committee on the Rights of the Child; and the Human Rights
Council and its mechanisms, including the Special Rapporteur on the Right to Education, should give
greater attention to monitoring and reporting attacks on education at all levels of schooling, where
relevant to their mandates. Governments and civil society organizations, in turn, should submit or
continue to submit to these bodies information about violations of international law that constitute
attacks on education.
• Country task forces of the UN-led MRM on grave violations against children in situations of armed conflict
should enhance monitoring and reporting of attacks on schools, teachers and other persons related to
the school (protected persons); threats of attacks against protected persons; and actions by parties to
the conflict which impede children’s access to education, including the military use of schools, as
requested by the Security Council in Resolution 1998 of July 2011. Although more information is being
gathered, gaps still remain, particularly in certain countries. Steps should include:
° Establishing or strengthening monitoring and reporting partnerships involving NGOs.
° Reporting in more detail about education. For example, country task forces that combine attacks on
schools and hospitals should disaggregate the information. In addition, reporting on killing and
maiming, sexual violence, and recruitment should specify if these violations took place in or en route
to or from schools.
° Linking data collection to action on the ground to prevent or respond to military use of schools and
attacks on schools and protected personnel, including, where appropriate, collaborating with
education ministries and authorities to better inform and trigger responses to attacks and monitor the
effectiveness of response measures.

