
PART II — THeMATIC eSSAYS

Guideline 6: All parties to armed conflict should, as far
as possible and as appropriate, incorporate these
Guidelines into their doctrine, military manuals, rules
of engagement, operational orders and other means
of dissemination, to encourage appropriate practice
throughout the chain of command.

Raising awareness of the Lucens
Guidelines
Securing implementation of the Guidelines requires a
powerful campaign to raise awareness. This needs to
reach out to both states and armed non-state actors.
Increased awareness of the practice and consequences of the military use of schools and universities
is vital — to prompt recognition of the need for
guidance and to increase the political will to secure
buy-in from government decision-makers and key
stakeholders from the wider domains of both
government and civil society.
How will the Guidelines be dealt with by military forces
and by relevant government departments in states?
Different states will approach the process of implementation, promulgation and achievement of an
appropriate degree of compliance in different ways.
There will be no hard and fast or universally acceptable
means of achieving these things. Civil society organizations will be key partners in this endeavour,
alongside those states willing to champion both the
reasoning behind the Guidelines and their content.
Supportive states will be important but so too will
armed non-state actors who will be made aware of the
benefits of compliance through support from NGOs.

Implementing the Lucens Guidelines
Each state will have its own ways of applying the
Guidelines. This is the case even for NATO members.
While NATO is the most sophisticated multinational
military organization in the world, with military
doctrine, tactics, techniques and procedures promulgated in Allied Publications, individual member states
retain publications for exclusively national use. Each
will decide how best to ensure compliance and,
although there will be similarities, one cannot assume
that all will do this in the same way. Some may choose

