
EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

domestic law. If many countries can be persuaded to follow
suit, significant progress could be made towards reducing the
number of schools put at risk of attack and the number of
students whose safety is threatened – and whose learning is
compromised – by the presence of troops and weapons in their
classrooms.

Military and security responses
Some military forces, education authorities and communities
have taken physical protection measures to secure schools
and teachers against attack. These include assigning armed or
unarmed guards to education institutions; establishing checkpoints near schools; reinforcing school infrastructure such as
building walls around school perimeters; providing housing for
students or personnel on campus or nearby; providing a
protective presence or escorts to accompany students or
teachers en route to and from schools; offering safer modes of
transportation; and arming teachers. Many of
these measures have been taken in Thailand’s
far south, for instance. Unarmed guards have
been used in Afghanistan.
Not all measures have proven effective. In some
contexts, measures such as security escorts may
be counterproductive and increase the
likelihood of teachers or schools being targeted
because it offers armed groups the opportunity
to target both soldiers and teachers in the same
incident. In southern Thailand, for instance,
there have been many attacks against troops
providing protection for teachers en route to
school in which either troops or troops and
teachers have been killed.

Negotiated solutions
In some cases, local community leaders, armed
groups or government forces, government
officials or external actors have negotiated with
attacking parties to prevent or end attacks or
military use of education facilities, for example,
in DRC and South Sudan where occupying forces
agreed to vacate schools.

Community responses
Communities have contributed to protection in a range of ways.
In Afghanistan, this has involved school management
committees in protecting schools, students and teachers;
setting up school defence committees; providing nightwatchmen; and running community schools or offering classes
in people’s homes, which are less likely to be attacked. In
Liberia, it has involved parents providing student escorts; in
Gaza, a community alert system was established; in Mexico,
teacher trade unions led protests demanding better security
measures; in Nepal, community members led negotiations to
ensure schools were respected by both sides in the conflict as
zones of peace; and in Côte d’Ivoire, local head teachers
helped in the monitoring of attacks.

Tailored protection
for teachers at risk
In Colombia, a Working Group on the Human Rights of
Teachers, composed of the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR) and representatives from the
Colombian government and the teacher trade unions,
provided support to threatened or targeted teachers,
university academics and trade union leaders through
various protection measures. Working on a case-by-case
basis, special committees studied the type and degree of risk
and the mode of protection that would be most effective,
including armed escorts or guards, mobile phones, bulletproof vehicles and temporary relocation, a 2009 education
International study reported. In 2010, the government
offered teachers at risk ‘provisional status’ so that they could
relocate rapidly while they waited for police to carry out a risk
assessment. According to the National Ministry of education,
of the 600 teaching staff who reported receiving death
threats in 2011, 38 left the country, 282 were given
temporary transfers and 38 were transferred permanently.

