



monitoring and reporting attacks on education, this mechanism is an important one among several avenues for improving the coverage of such attacks. The key questions are how can it be strengthened to enable better data collection and use, and how can it be complemented to ensure that the full range of attacks is consistently monitored and that the data contribute towards efforts to enhance protection, risk avoidance and recovery.Origins of the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism on Children and Armed ConflictThe UN Security Council first called for an annual listing of parties who use children in armed conflict in 2001 (Resolution 1379). Time-bound action plans for halting recruitment and releasing child soldiers were introduced by Security Council Resolution 1539 in 2004. State and non-state actors had to agree to such plans with UN Country Teams269 or face the possibility of sanctions. Subsequently, an international Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism (MRM) was established by SC Resolution 1612 (2005), to provide “timely, accurate, reliable and objective” information to the Security Council on six grave violations against children in armed conflict, including “attacks on schools and hospitals”. For the first time, there was an attempt to put in place a system of monitoring and reporting, with UN Country Teams establishing MRM Task Forces in each listed state and feeding incidence data to the Security Council.However, the only countries monitored by the MRM are those that are officially listed in the annexes of the reports of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict. Until now, countries have been listed only for recruitment and use of child soldiers, although once listed the other five grave violations can also be monitored. Even then, not all countries where significant levels of recruitment or use of child soldiers are reported have been listed: India is a prime example.As a result, the imperative to monitor attacks on education via the MRM currently exists only in 14 countries, compared with 31 countries listed in this study as having experienced attacks on education between January 2007 and July 2009. In March 2009, the annexes to the Secretary-General’s 8th Annual Report on Children and Armed Conflict listed parties to conflict from the following countries: 

269 United Nations Country Teams are composed of the representatives of the UN operational agencies on the ground in a country. In complex emergencies or disasters, the UN Resident Coordinator plays the leading role in coordinating the programmes and actions of all countries with a UN presence.

