
to incorporate the Guidelines into doctrine, some to
include them in relevant manuals (including those
dealing with the law of armed conflict) and some
might favour reflecting them in command and control
arrangements (such as rules of engagement).
Doctrine is essentially ‘that which is taught’. It is a
guide for military commanders about ways of
achieving tactical and operational success. It establishes ways of thinking about operations and also acts
as a way of promulgating procedures necessary to
make a military force work as a coherent whole. It is
important at all levels, from military-strategic to
tactical, but for the Guidelines the tactical level will be
especially significant. Since doctrine provides the
framework and content of tactical training, it would be
a good way of ensuring compliance with the
Guidelines.
Another way to promulgate Guidelines would be in
legal manuals. The Guidelines are not law, however;
indeed, they are an attempt to provide more
protection for education than the law currently
demands. For this reason, some states may include
them in legal manuals; others may not. Importantly,
many states do not have legal manuals of their own.392
The more sophisticated military powers do, but most
states do not and often rely on commercially
published versions – including versions produced by
the more established military powers,393 such as the
United Kingdom and German armed forces, for
example, which reflect the views of those governments.394 It would be useful if states with their own
legal manuals could be persuaded to adopt the
Guidelines and reflect them in their manuals, but it
may take some time – the UK’s manual was first
published in 2004 and is only now undergoing its first
review.
A further suggestion is to reflect them in rules of
engagement (ROE). There is value in this approach
because ROE are a command and control mechanism
giving precise instructions to those operating at the
tactical level about what they can and cannot do. For
example, if a state had adopted the Guidelines and, in
so doing, had agreed not to use school buildings for
military purpose except in extreme circumstances,
high-level commanders could use ROE to either

EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

restrict a tactical commander’s choices or allow him to
use a school exceptionally if the situation demanded it.
Another issue to consider is enforcement. No international agreement is automatically enforceable, even
if it is agreed in a treaty. The Guidelines will not be
binding internationally – but this does not mean they
cannot be legally binding domestically. Breaches of
the Guidelines would be unlawful if they contravene
orders issued through the military chain of command.
Non-compliance would then represent an offence
under the military justice arrangements in the states
that adopt them.

and capable of implementation through a range of
mechanisms that are already employed to achieve
compliance with the law.
Once the final version of the Lucens Guidelines has
been produced, they will require endorsement or
adoption, implementation and some measure of
compliance and enforcement. As GCPEA and other
bodies take the Guidelines forward, additional
thought needs to be devoted to how the least capable
states and armed non-state actors might be advised to
proceed and what mechanisms they will need to put in
place to ensure compliance.

Armed non-state groups are most unlikely to use the
range of publications and command and control
mechanisms common within the armed forces of
states. Such groups often emerge or coalesce during
crises within states and their command arrangements
will often be informal. Although some groups exist for
extended periods, many are short-lived coalitions of
disparate elements. The most effective and organized
will have a command and control process of some
sort, however. The Guidelines will require implementation through that. A number of organizations work
with armed non-state groups to promote their
compliance with international law; these organizations could be encouraged to include the Guidelines in
this work.

Conclusions
It is evident that a great deal needs to be done to
protect education – students, teachers, academics,
administrators and the schools, universities and other
establishments in which education is delivered – from
the effects of armed conflict. This is particularly the
case when it comes to military use of schools and
universities. The Draft Lucens Guidelines are
consistent with the law but are intended to lead to
behaviour on the ground that should provide a greater
degree of protection than even the law demands. The
Guidelines have been produced through a process
that has involved substantial input from the military
and defence and foreign ministries of a range of interested states. The process has also taken into account
the special demands of the armed non-state actor
community. The Guidelines are pragmatic, realistic

