



push these angles, we can increasingly win acceptance and move to a more legalistic status, towards making schools and places of learning safe sanctuaries.” Sheldon Shaeffer concurs that promoting schools as safe zones should be a priority, but it requires agreement from all parties. The best place to start may be in trying to encourage popular resistance to the attacks. “I think it is about mobilization of people to come out strongly and say schools are off limits.” He thinks more effort should be made to persuade the moderate elements in the region to “weigh in visibly, heavily, strongly, publicly against these kinds of attacks.”In Colombia, the Federación Colombiana de Educadores, working on similar lines, has launched a campaign for schools to be treated as a neutral territory in the armed conﬂ ict. Mario Novelli argues that there should be some pressure to stop using the education system as a battleground, whether that involves guerrillas or paramilitaries occupying schools or the way politics is being fought out in the universities. There appears to be support from experts in UNESCO, UNICEF and Education International for a concerted effort to ﬁ nd ways of embedding protection of teachers in protection for schools and institutions, and the education process. “Our approach is to negotiate with both parties in a conﬂ ict to respect schools as safe zones - just as in health we can get behind rebel lines and say we are here to vaccinate children,” says Cream Wright. “That is the issue we should all work at, whether it is through a legal framework or something else, for mutuality and respect for education as a safe zone.”Save the Children has suggested devising an internationally recognised protective symbol, akin to the red cross used on hospitals and ambulances, to highlight sanctuary status. Jan Eastman, Deputy General Secretary of Education International, says the task now is to generate political will. “There could be an international commitment replicated at national and local level that education should be a conﬂ ict-free zone, not only because it is a human right, but also because education through inclusive schools should be regarded as the solution, the key to harmony, the key to building social justice, peace and hope for the future.” 

