



then invited influential people from across the communities, including supporters of the opposition or anti-government elements such as the Taliban, for consultations to tease out why schools have remained closed and suggest compromises that would increase a sense of local ownership of schools and their curriculum. “They are inviting people regardless of their political beliefs, and people are coming to the meetings,” says Fazlul Haque, UNICEF’s Chief of Education in Kabul.238 Some objected to using the term “school”, others feared the curriculum or regulations were anti-Islamic. In response, the government is allowing the word “school” in the school’s name to be changed to “madrasa”. It is also permitting communities to nominate a local trained teacher of their choice to join the school’s staff and ensure that nothing anti-Islamic is taking place. Further, it is challenging people to root through the curriculum or textbooks, telling them that if they find anything anti-Islamic it will be changed. Schools have also been told to build prayer breaks into the timetable.“It gives a sense that this is our school, the way we want it. The government is compromising and the communities are becoming motivated,” says Haque. “They are taking care to ensure schools are opened and nobody is attacking them”.In March 2009, following this initiative, 161 schools re-opened compared to 35 in 2007-2008; and in the crucial first month of term, when schools are particularly vulnerable to attack, no violent incidents were reported.239Recovery measures for schoolsApart from prevention, a second way to minimize the impact of attacks is to support rapid recovery. UNICEF has a longstanding policy of visiting schools within 72 hours of an attack and providing an emergency education package of tents for classrooms and boxes of teaching and learning materials within five days. In Afghanistan, that job is made harder by the fact that, for their own safety, UN staff are no longer allowed to travel in half the country, so local partners have to be used.In some situations, a major obstacle is the continuing use of schools as either bases by security forces or shelters for IDPs. Negotiations may be required to return the buildings to their use as schools. In eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, where occupation of schools by IDPs and by armed groups and the army has occurred, 

238 Fazlul Haque, interview with the author, April 23, 2009.239 Ibid.

