
PART I — GLOBAL OveRvIeW

these examples demonstrates that education clusters
at country level could have an important role in
encouraging wider involvement in monitoring,
assessment and the use of collected data to inform a
full range of responses. Education clusters can also
work with child protection clusters to develop
integrated inter-cluster responses. In Israel/Palestine,
the Working Group on Grave Violations against
Children has developed such an approach between
the Child Protection and Education Clusters.135
Government
Ministries and government bodies have monitored
threats as well as the impact of attacks on education
as part of their duty to provide education. In many
contexts, they are well placed to do so because
collecting data on student enrolment, attendance and
learning achievements and on teacher attendance
and teaching standards, as well as on school infrastructure and learning materials, is a core part of their
work.
However, some governments either lack the political
will or the capacity to monitor and respond to attacks
on education. In some situations, they may
themselves be complicit in, or responsible for, violations against students or education personnel or for
the military use of education facilities. Governments
may also resist or block international monitoring, even
of the activities of rebel groups, for political reasons.
Civil society
Monitoring, data collection, assessment and reporting
by civil society, community-based organizations, and
national and international NGOs have continued to
grow. The development of local organizations’
capacity to do this requires further support. At the
international level, Human Rights Watch, Watchlist on
Children and Armed Conflict, CARE and others have
published in-depth investigations in recent years.
The most glaring gap in data collection is the absence
of global monitoring of attacks on higher education,
although rescue networks and Education International
do provide international alerts about the cases of
individuals. In recent years, Scholars at Risk launched
a monitoring project tracking violent and coercive
attacks on higher education in a range of countries

