
SUMMARY

This study, which follows earlier studies
published by UNeSCO in 2007 and 2010, is the
most comprehensive examination of attacks on
education to date. Based on extensive data
gathering for the period 2009-2012 and information on key incidents in the first nine months
of 2013, it finds that over the past five years,
armed non-state groups, state military and
security forces, and armed criminal groups have
attacked thousands of schoolchildren,
university students, teachers, academics and
education establishments in at least 70
countries worldwide.
The study reports in detail on 30 countries where there was a
significant pattern of attacks in the five-year reporting period
and lists 40 other countries where isolated attacks took place.
It concludes that targeted attacks on education and incidents
of military use of schools and universities are occurring in far
more countries and far more extensively than previously
documented. It is not known whether this reflects growing
awareness of the problem and more and better reporting of
such attacks since the earlier studies were published or an
actual increase in the number of attacks.
Many attacks involve bombing or burning schools or universities, or killing, injuring, kidnapping, or illegally arresting,
detaining or torturing students, teachers and academics.
Hundreds have died as a result and hundreds of thousands
more have missed out on the right to an education. In many
places, children and young people, and those who teach them,
live in fear of attacks.
The 30 countries profiled all have five or more incidents or
victims including at least one direct attack on a school or the
killing of at least one teacher, student or academic. They are:
Afghanistan, Bahrain, Central African Republic (CAR),
Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo
(DRC), Egypt, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
Israel/Palestine, Kenya, Libya, Mali, Mexico, Myanmar,
Nigeria, Pakistan, the Philippines, Russia, Somalia, South
Sudan, Sudan, Syria, Thailand, Turkey, Yemen and Zimbabwe.
The 40 other countries where isolated attacks were reported
are: Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Belarus, Brazil, Cambodia,
Chad, Chile, China, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
8

France, Georgia, Guatemala, Haiti, Ireland, Kyrgyzstan, Liberia,
Malawi, Maldives, Malaysia, Nepal, Papua New Guinea,
Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Swaziland,
Sweden, Togo, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates
(UAE), Uganda, Ukraine, the United Kingdom (UK), Uzbekistan,
Venezuela and Vietnam.

EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

‘School teachers?
We will kill them!’
In Nigeria, from January to September 2013, some 30 teachers were
reportedly shot dead, sometimes during class. The Associated Press
reported that in a video statement made in July 2013, Abubakar Shekau,
leader of the militant Islamist group Boko Haram, threatened teachers,
saying: ‘School teachers who are teaching Western education? We will
kill them! We will kill them!’; he also endorsed recent school attacks and
claimed that non-Islamic schools should be burned down. Boko Haram,
whose commonly used name means ‘Western education is a sin’ in
Hausa, has sought to impose a strict form of Sharia, or Islamic law, in
northern Nigeria and partially destroyed or burned down 50 schools in
the first seven months of 2013, according to Amnesty International.

A teacher peers into a deserted student hostel at the
Government Secondary School of Mamudo in Yobe state,
Nigeria, where gunmen killed at least 22 students and a
teacher in the middle of the night on 6 July 2013.
© 2013 Aminu Abubakar/AFP/Getty Images

