



Between 2007 and 2008, the UN recorded 5,517 cases of sexual violence against children in the conflict areas of Ituri and North and South Kivu, representing 31 per cent of sexual violence victims, according to Human Rights Watch.169“Most girls are targeted on their way to or from school, as well as at the market,” says Sayo Aoki, a former UNICEF education specialist in Goma.170The violation often leaves women homeless and destitute as hundreds of thousands of men, fearing the stigma of rape, turn their backs on their wives. “This has to be one of the worst places in the world to be a woman,” Martin Hartberg, a protection adviser in Goma for Oxfam, told IRIN. “It is as if rape has become ingrained into the culture of these armed groups, and it is very difficult to turn that tide without overall security reform in this country”.A 20-year minimum sentence for rape and sexual attacks was introduced in 2006, but there are few prosecutions.Joseph Ciza, who helps to run the HEAL Africa hospital for victims of sexual violence in Goma, believes the solution lies in human rights education. “Everyone must be taught that women have value and human rights,” he told IRIN. “If that happens, then militia commanders can teach it to their recruits, children will grow up knowing that rape is bad, things can change”.171Honorata escaped from her captors by running away when they were distracted by fighting. She walked 300 kilometres to save herself. But when she got home her family disowned her. “They said I was violated by Hutus. I had to leave. I found other women in the same situation. We lived together in a house. A few months later there was an attack of Tutsis. They came in our house. They all raped us again”. She wanted to kill herself then, and bled for two weeks. But she was helped by a nun and eventually joined a women’s advocacy organization, Women for Women. Today she is an international women’s rights programme trainer and travels around the country raising awareness of the problem. 

169 HRW, “Taking the Next Step: Strengthening the Security Council’s Response to Sexual Violence and Attacks on Education in Armed Conflict,” April 20, 2009.170 Sayo Aoki, interview with author, June 2009.171 IRIN News, “DRC: Rape Crisis Set to Worsen Amid Kivu Chaos,” November 19, 2008.

