



to education, teaching and research can only be fully enjoyed in an atmosphere of academic freedom and autonomy for institutions of higher education” and that staff should work in an environment that does not harm their health and safety. The academic community is particularly vulnerable to political pressures that could undermine academic freedom because of its inﬂ uence on public opinion, to a similar degree as journalists. There is a need to convince both sides in a conﬂ ict that destroying or undermining the education of a country’s citizens will mortgage its future development no matter what the outcome of the ﬁ ghting. The other serious obstacle is the perception that education is not neutral: in many situations it is part of the problem. Although the armed groups that burn down schools and assassinate teachers espouse varying political aims, there are often deeper underlying reasons why schools in particular are singled out as targets. Attacks on education are rarely discrete events. They tend to reﬂ ect the ongoing struggle in society, whether religious, ethnic, sectarian or political. And while education can be pivotal in helping to bring countries out of the fragile state into which they have fallen through war, it can also be a ﬂ ashpoint for tension, because it can seem to reinforce a more general sense of injustice, for instance through unequal distribution of the beneﬁ ts of development or restrictions on the freedom to express and learn about one’s culture. “If you look at the major civil wars in West Africa, in Liberia, Sierra Leone, Cote d’Ivoire,” says Cream Wright, “most of the young people forced into ﬁ ghting on both sides want to reintegrate. Once they are rescued and demobilized, invariably their ﬁ rst demand is for education. And yet these are the same people who destroy schools. Part of their grievance is having being denied the beneﬁ ts of education and so they are attacking those who have beneﬁ ted or the places where they have beneﬁ ted.” In Sierra Leone, according to Save the Children, the ranks of the rebel forces (Revolutionary United Front) were swelled by school dropouts, pushouts and those who had never been to school. “Symbols and signs of education and schooling were targeted for destruction,” says Ekundayo Thompson, a lecturer in education and human rights at Njala University. “By 2004, 60 per cent of primary schools and 40 per cent of secondary schools still needed major rehabilitation or reconstruction.”96In other conﬂ ict-affected countries, ‘hate’ curricula and the use of propagandist history textbooks to stir up aggressive nationalism or demonize rival ethnic communities, 

96 Ekundayo J D Thompson, March 2007, ‘The Sierra Leone Civil War: Destruction of Educational Infrastructure’.

