
PART I — GLOBAL OveRvIeW

Response and prevention
So what can be done to stop attacks on education and
how can their impact be limited? There are many ways
in which the problem is already being addressed. An
important first step is to gather more information
about the nature, scale and location of the threat
through monitoring, assessment and reporting. There
are ways to deter attacks by holding perpetrators to
account and to reduce military use through laws and
policies that prohibit the practice. Numerous ways of
improving security for schools have been attempted.
Negotiations have been held with armed groups and
government forces to treat schools as zones of peace,
free of military activity. Education ministries and
authorities can address grievances that otherwise
may increase the risk of attack by developing and
implementing conflict-sensitive policies and curricula.
However, while more information has been gathered
on prevention and response since the last Education
under Attack study was published in 2010, rigorous,
empirical and comparative research into the effectiveness of different measures is still lacking, in part
due to the major methodological challenges of
conducting such research.124 The appropriateness of
the response used depends heavily on the nature of
the attacks and their perpetrators, as well as the
overall conflict and community dynamics in a given
situation. A clear understanding is still needed of
exactly how these factors influence the success or
failure of a particular intervention in different
contexts; the relative advantages of one intervention
over another given the nature of attacks, their perpetrators and motives; and the potential negative side
effects, unintended consequences and trade-offs.125

Monitoring, assessment and reporting
Monitoring, assessment and reporting involve
documenting abuses, analysing their impacts and
using the data and analysis for advocacy as well as to
inform policy development, service delivery and other
responses intended to prevent or remedy these
problems and thereby shield education from attack.
For instance, reporting of threats of attack can be used
to trigger evacuation, temporary closure of schools or
heightened security measures. Documenting military

