
committed against the higher education community.
For example, the first Report of the independent international commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic,352 which investigated alleged violations of
human rights between March 2011 and November
2011, did not report on the raid by security forces on
the dormitories of students at Damascus University in
June 2011, when three students were killed, 21 injured
and 130 arrested after students refused to participate
in pro-government rallies.353 Similarly, in its later
report of 16 August 2012,354 the commission did not
report on a raid by security forces at Aleppo University
in May 2012, when four students were killed, 28
injured and 200 arrested.355
Other UN bodies that have mandates related to human
rights, education and conflict are in a good position to
monitor and report attacks on education. Several of
them are better positioned to monitor attacks on
primary and secondary levels of education, and thus
attacks on higher education are monitored less. To be
explored is whether such agencies as OHCHR, the
Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) Protection
and Education Clusters, and the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(UNOCHA) might contribute to efforts to promote and
improve assessment and monitoring of attacks on
higher education. The monitoring work of some of
these agencies is activated only to the extent that
attacks on higher education affect humanitarian
access, thus leaving large gaps in reporting. The UN
MRM has the most explicit mandate to monitor attacks
on education at the levels of schools, students and
teachers, but higher education is not within its
purview.
Local and international NGOs may play an important
role in monitoring and reporting attacks on higher
education, especially in those cases where
government or state-backed forces have been implicated in attacks. Scholars at Risk has recently
launched such an initiative to track and report on five
defined types of attacks on higher education communities and their members: improper travel restrictions;
retaliatory discharge or dismissal; wrongful detention;
wrongful prosecution; and killings, violence or disappearances. An ‘other’ category is used to track
incidents outside the defined categories which may

EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

significantly impair academic freedom or the human
rights of members of higher education communities,
such as violent student unrest, systemic discrimination or intimidation, university closures, military
use of higher education facilities and direct attacks on
university facilities or materials.356 Dissemination of
monitoring data by email, a website and in periodic
reports will help raise awareness and support future
advocacy for greater protection.
Documenting and reporting attacks are important for
holding perpetrators accountable, prosecuting them
at different levels and deterring future attacks.
However, collecting data that seek to map and
document responsibility for attacks is far more
difficult than reporting attacks. Current monitoring
efforts reflect some progress but also significant gaps.

National and transnational advocacy campaigns
Linked to the need for monitoring and reporting
mechanisms is the crucial role that national and international civil society advocacy – as a mechanism of
reporting, accountability, protection and prevention –
can play in addressing the issue of attacks on higher
education and academic freedom, particularly if the
perpetrator is a national government in a ‘non-conflict’
situation, which is often the case in the higher
education sector. Transnational networks, linked
through a myriad of organizations such as Human
Rights Watch, Amnesty International and Education
International and activated by national civil society
and human rights organizations, can be – when
successfully mobilized and coordinated – a powerful
force for protection of higher education communities.
Letters of protest and ‘urgent actions’ sent to international organizations, solidarity networks, and
pressure on government embassies can raise the
international profile of violations, making them visible
and increasing the costs of politically-motivated
violence or coercion. All of this pressure relies on
national civil society and human rights organizations
providing regular and well-documented evidence
upon which campaigns can be based.

legitimated both domestically and internationally and
to be seen as accepted members of the international
community. This is reflected in the increase in state
signatories to human rights agreements over the past
four decades, which appear important not just on the
international stage but also for national public
consumption.357 Similar reputational pressures may
be an avenue for increasing protection for higher
education communities, insofar as the higher
education sector is highly reputation-sensitive:
academic personnel, students, institutions and
national systems are themselves increasingly
integrated, and eager to partner with international
counterparts who could be mobilized to demand
greater security, autonomy and accountability.
In research on transnational advocacy movements,
Keck and Sikkink358 talk about the ‘boomerang effect’
whereby channels for change are blocked at the
national level and processes of transnational
advocacy assist in mobilizing external actors to
pressure the state and therefore change its behaviour.
Such transnational civil society pressure appears to be
an important variable in encouraging human rights
compliance and this is where global civil society
activism has the potential to make a real difference.
This can provide a solid rationale for an international
advocacy strategy on higher education attacks. The
recent campaign to free Miguel Ángel Beltrán, the
Colombian sociologist, is an illustrative example. From
the time of his detention in May 2009 to his release in
June 2011, a powerful global campaign gathered
petitions signed by thousands of teachers and
academics and activists,359 and lobbied the
Colombian government and their own respective
national governments to raise Dr Beltrán’s case.360
One caveat concerning this mechanism of protection
is that its power rests on the need of the perpetrators
for legitimacy. Similar to respect for university
autonomy, such pressure is less likely to work on
armed non-state actors, unless they are at a stage
where they are seeking legitimacy, and even less so on
criminal gangs.

The effectiveness of this type of protection measure
relies on the perpetrator’s sensitivity and need to
maintain international respectability. This appears
intimately related to the need of nation states to be

