



schools. A similar process has taken place in universities, where the Colombian Universities Workers’ union has organised demonstrations. As the leaders of protests, education trade unionists have become targets of violence and threats. The tactics used against them have switched since President Uribe came to power in 2002 from assassination towards arbitrary detainment, according to Novelli.Movements defending education against cuts and cost recovery have emerged in a number of countries in Latin America and Africa. The Oaxaca uprising in Mexico was triggered in May 2006 by protests by Section 22 of the National Teachers’ Union. It is reported that they were demanding free school uniforms and breakfast for students, more scholarships, and more funding for school buildings and equipment. They were beaten while asleep in tents by baton-wielding police ofﬁ cers and tear gas grenades were ﬁ red at them from helicopters. Four protestors were killed, including one teacher, and another protesting teacher was later assassinated. Gunmen opened ﬁ re on teachers during several later protests and protestors retaliated with other violent acts such as burning buses.39The motive for forced recruitment of child soldiers appears to be a common strategy to increase troop levels and logistical support, an extreme example of forced child labour, but the act of abduction is also a means to spread terror and undermine resistance to the armed group from the local population. But recruitment is not conﬁ ned to rebel forces. For example, the Government of Sudan forcibly recruited children in their early teens in 2000 and trained and assigned them to provide security for the Heglig oil facility in the Greater Nile, where they were ordered to carry out ‘human rights abuses against their neighbours and relatives, including killing people, burning villages and looting food’.40 The Watchlist on Children in Armed Conﬂ ict reported in 2003 that children, some as young as 10, were being used extensively by both government and opposition forces in Sudan and that many had been forcibly recruited on both sides. 

39 Duncan Kennedy, BBC online, 23 August 2006, ‘Mexico Teachers Extend Protests’.40 Watchlist on Children in Armed Conﬂ ict, March 2003, Sudan, www.watchlist.org.

