
PART II — THeMATIC eSSAYS

teachers. However, government authorities have not
always taken into consideration or reacted through
protection measures to risk reports from the
Ombudsman’s office reporting human rights violations in the country.350 Elsewhere, government actions
can actually endanger higher education. In India,
government troops and paramilitary police have been
based in schools and on at least one college campus
as part of their counter-insurgency strategy against the
Naxalites, a practice that has increased the risk that
these facilities may be attacked or that students and
staff may be caught in the crossfire.351
More generally, governments may lack the capacity or
the will to monitor attacks on education. In particular,
this is often the case in conflict-affected areas.
Governments may not be operative in, exert control
over, or be in communication with many areas within
the country’s territory. In other cases, governments
may be implicated in the attacks, so they have an
interest in obstructing or diverting the whole process
of data monitoring and collection.
UN human rights mechanisms, such as the Human
Rights Council’s Universal Periodic Review (UPR) and
its Special Procedures, treaty bodies, and fact-finding
missions and commissions of inquiry are well
positioned to monitor, report and hold states
accountable for their human rights violations related
to the higher education community. Through the UPR,
the human rights records of all UN member states are
reviewed, allowing for an opportunity to inject
attention to higher education through that process.
The Human Rights Committee and the Committee on
Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights are treaty bodies
that monitor a number of human rights obligations
relevant to the protection of higher education; more
information relating to any violations of these obligations should be presented to the treaty bodies.
Similarly, the joint ILO/UNESCO Committee of Experts
is charged with monitoring and promoting adherence
to the 1997 Recommendation on the Status of Higher
Education Teaching Personnel; the committee may
provide another avenue for presenting evidence of
state failure to protect higher education from attack.
UN fact-finding missions and commissions of inquiry
should also be encouraged to specifically investigate
violations of humanitarian law and human rights

