
EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

• Education ministries and international agencies should support in policy and practice the development
of contingency plans to ensure that schools and universities are equipped to respond to attacks and
resume educational activities as soon as possible.
• Academics, practitioners and education providers, including international and local organizations,
should conduct rigorously designed in-country and comparative research to illuminate what programmes
successfully protect education and why, taking into account the fact that attacks are often highly contextspecific. All actors should make use of available relevant research to inform their responses.

Higher education
Greater efforts are needed to strengthen the protection, and promote the resilience, of higher education institutions. Stronger guarantees of university autonomy, academic freedom and security are essential in the face of a
wide variety of attacks and threats.
• States should publicly affirm their responsibilities to protect higher education from attack, including
abstaining from direct or complicit involvement in attacks and preventing and deterring attacks. This
should include conducting thorough investigations of any incidents which occur, reporting findings in an
open and transparent way, and holding perpetrators accountable under law.
• All states should promote the security and autonomy of higher education institutions at all times and
prevent violence and intimidation against academics. To this end, states should encourage, within higher
education communities and society generally, a culture of respect for institutional autonomy, including
rejection of external ideological or political interference. Suitable measures may include new policies,
regulations and laws that promote both institutional autonomy and the security of higher education
communities.
• States and other relevant organizations should do everything in their power to protect higher education
personnel from threats and danger, including by providing support to those who seek refuge from such
threats or danger in another country.
• More information about the nature, scale and impact of attacks on higher education is needed. States,
higher education institutions and professionals, UN and international agencies, and NGOs should
support and expand research on and monitoring of attacks on higher education communities.

