



On 18 March 2007, three students were killed and seven injured when assailants attacked an Islamic boarding school, Bamrungsart Pondok School, in Sabyoi District, Songkhla Province. Attackers hurled explosives and fired bullets into dormitories where 75 boys were sleeping. Two boys aged 14 and one aged 12 were killed. Seven students, aged 13 to 17, were treated for gunshot wounds and other injuries.765 On 14 March 2007, five primary pupils were injured when gunmen fired on their bus in Narathiwat, and two teenage girls were killed on their way to final examinations in Yala Province when their minibus was attacked. Rebels placed logs on the road to force it to stop and put chains of spikes down to stop other vehicles approaching.766 Human rights organizations alleged that separatists were recruiting children to carry out attacks. The most active separatist group, the National Revolutionary Front-Coordinate (BRN-C), reportedly selected students from Islamic schools for after-school study groups that were used to recruit children.767The International Crisis Group warned in June 2009 that Thai insurgents continued to enlist young Malay Muslims, especially from private Islamic schools. The classroom is the first point of contact. Recruiters are believed to target devout, hard-working students to join extracurricular indoctrination programmes, during which their suitability is assessed.768VenezuelaTwo students and two academics were injured on the campus of Universidad de Los Andes (ULA) in western Venezuela in August 2009 during an attack by a group of 30 suspected government supporters. The intruders, some of them carrying guns, burst into the canteen and attacked students. Witnesses said the attackers were known leaders of President Hugo Chavez’s local movements. The attack appears to have been aimed at weakening opposition to the government’s new education plans, which critics say will end university autonomy.769 

765 Scott Conroy, “Attack on Thai School Kills 3 Students.”766 UNICEF, “UN Condemns Attacks on Schoolchildren in Southern Thailand”; and AFP, “Nine Shot Dead in Thai Muslim South.”767 Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers, Child Soldiers Global Report 2008.768 ICG, “Recruiting Militants in Southern Thailand,” media release, June 22, 2009.769 Jonathan Travis, “Venezuela: Students and Staff Injured on Campus,” University World News, August 30, 2009.

