



They may follow the example of Ehab Hassoon, a student at Baghdad’s Mustansiriya University, who decided after the bombings in January 2007 that it was time to stay home. “Life is more important than a diploma,” he told the Washington Times.73 The burning and bombing of schools and assassinations of teachers and students in Afghanistan have also ‘severely affected’ education in some provinces, with girls’ education hit hardest, according to Human Rights Watch. But the impact nationally is masked by steady increases in enrolment across other parts of the country. Nevertheless, Human Rights Watch reports: ‘These attacks have forced many schools to close and made it nearly impossible to open new schools,’ Human Rights Watch says. “Where schools do remain open, parents are often afraid to send their children – in particular girls – to school.”74 For every night letter threatening a teacher or parent, every seizure of a girl on her way to school and every school burned, there is a knock-on effect deterring many others from going to school. One provincial ofﬁ cial in Kandahar told Human Rights Watch that in the ﬁ rst three years after the fall of the Taliban, everybody wanted to send their daughters to school. “For example, in Argandob district, girls were ready, women teachers were ready. But when two or three schools burned, then nobody wanted to send their girls to school after that,” the ofﬁ cial said.In March 2006, President Karzai said 100,000 children who had gone to school in 2003 and 2004 were no longer attending. Human Rights Watch said in 2006 that research suggested hundreds of thousands of students who had been attending school are now shut out, especially in the south and south-east. In March 2007, it was reported that 111 of 224 schools in Helmand province were closed. Schools were operating in only 3 of the province’s 14 districts.75 Tom Koenigs, UN Special Representative to Afghanistan, said: “These attacks amount to a denial of the human right to education for Afghanistan’s children.”The impact on education of the psychological trauma caused by attacks and displacement is another important factor. Witnessing atrocities can have a severe psychological impact on pupils and staff alike. In November, for example, a 48-year-old teacher was shot and burned to death in front of terriﬁ ed staff and students in 

73 James Palmer, Washington Times, 19 January 2007, ‘Bombing Latest Blow to Colleges’.74 Human Rights Watch, 15 February 2007, ‘Insecurity and Attacks on Schools: Afghanistan and Iraq’.75 Jean Mackenzie, Herald News, 13 March 2007, ‘Taliban Again Target Schools in Afghanistan’, The education ministry estimated that female attendance at school nationally is 40 per cent. But UNICEF said only 5 per cent of girls attend secondary school.

