
Afghanistan: Pupils in Lycee Aino, Kandahar, Afghanistan.© UNESCO/Roya Aziz/Star Group




because they did not. In Nepal and Sri Lanka, the root causes of conﬂ ict lie in the failure of successive governments to provide broad-based development and social justice, and the role of education is contested. There are arguments over access to education in remote areas, the language of instruction, distribution of the education budget and the focus of the curriculum.35In some cases, attacks are part of a strategy of degrading the infrastructure of a resistant power by occupying forces. During Operation Defensive Shield in the Palestinian Autonomous Territories in 2002, for instance, Israeli forces destroyed 11 schools and damaged 112, and damaged the Ministry of Education, conﬁ scating equipment and records.36 But some students may also be targeted because they are suspected of being involved in resistance activities, such as attacking troops with stones. Between 2000 and 2005, around 3,000 school children were detained by Israeli forces.By contrast, separatists target schools and universities as a symbol of the state they oppose and because they are relatively soft targets. Hamas, for instance, detonated a remote controlled bomb at Hebrew University, Jerusalem, in July 2002, killing and injuring students.37In some countries, such as Colombia, the targeting of teachers reﬂ ects their political role in taking a stand on human rights or social justice on behalf of their community. They come under pressure from both sides in the conﬂ ict because, as the most educated members of the local population, many of them have become spokespeople on local issues for the communities in which they live, such as disagreements over the extraction of local resources by multinational companies and human rights violations. Mario Novelli,38 a researcher on the Colombian conﬂ ict based at Amsterdam University, says teachers are being killed because they are involving themselves in campaigns defending the right to education. Teachers have been in the forefront of opposing budget cuts, which have led to the introduction of ‘cost recovery’ mechanisms, such as school fees for secondary education, and encouraged the setting up of private 

35 Charu Lata Hogg, Chatham House/Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers, 2006, ‘Child Recruitment in South Asian Conﬂ icts: A Comparative Analysis of Sri Lanka, Nepal and Bangladesh’. 36 Susan Nicolai, 2006, Forced Migration Review, Education Supplement, ‘Education and Chronic Crisis in Palestine’.37 Watchlist on Children in Armed Conﬂ ict, September 2002, Israel/Palestinian Occupied Territory, which also quotes two UNICEF reports, Occupied Palestinian Territory, Donor Alert, 2 April 2002, and Occupied Palestinian Territory, Donor, Update, 29 May 2002.38 Mario Novelli is currently carrying out research on violence against the education community in situ in Colombia, supported by IIEP-UNESCO, Education International and the Netherlands government. Contact: m.novelli@uva.nl

