



the guerrilla army’s capacity. The table above shows the LRA-related attacks between January and May 2009 with a massive increase in abductions in March.103“When the armed groups attack the schools, the motive is normally recruitment,” says Sayo Aoki, a former UNICEF education specialist in Goma. “Schools are targeted for forced recruitment because of the certainty of finding a large number of people in one location”.104Attacks on schools and schoolchildren are not perceived as targeted attacks on education, but as part of widespread violence in the eastern part of the country.In November and December 2008, CNDP rebels controlling Rutsuru forced the population to open schools that had been closed due to insecurity and parents’ fears for their children’s safety. Parents were worried that their children might be forcibly recruited at school or en route, or become separated in fleeing an attack. Displaced teachers were forced to return to the schools to teach in breach of the Geneva Convention. “CNDP is known to be media savvy,” says Aoki, “and it is understood that they aimed to transmit the image that everything was under control by showing the world’s media the ‘normal situation’ symbolized by children in schools”.105 Israel has said its motive for bombing various educational institutions in Gaza during Operation Cast Lead was to eliminate threats of attack. It maintains its forces bombed the Islamic University of Gaza science laboratory on 29 December 2008 because it was being used as a “research and development centre for Hamas weapons”, though no evidence was produced for the claim.106“The government buildings are a place where financial, logistical and human resources serve to support terror,” Captain Benjamin Rutland, a spokesman for the Israeli military, told the New York Times. “Much of the [Hamas] government is involved in the active support and planning of terror”.107In a public statement in October 2006, the Maoists in Chhattisgarh State, India, defended their destruction of schools with the following statement:As for destroying schools used by the CRPF [Central Reserve Police Force, a state-controlled paramilitary police force] as their camps, neither the people nor our Party think it is wrong. The schools, once they are occupied by these 

103 According to UNICEF Eastern Congo Zonal Office- Goma.104 Sayo Aoki, interview with the author, July 2009.105 Ethan Bronner, “Is the Real Target Hamas Rule?” New York Times, January 3, 2009, http://www.nytimes.com/2009/01/04/world/middleeast/04assess.html?scp=3&sq=Gaza+university+&st=nyt. 106 The Economist, “The Struggle for Gaza: Where Will It End?” January 8, 2009, 22-24.107 Bronner, “Is the Real Target Hamas Rule?”

