



There was no time to tell his wife and young child what he was about to do. Makahamadze and seven others who feared for their lives, including four teachers, decided to flee to South Africa.“I couldn’t believe that I was about to lose my life,” he says. “I thought of my family, my friends from school and all of my achievements. I’d lost hope. It felt like I was dead”.Travelling at night under the cover of darkness, and hiding by day, they walked 200km before hitching a lift to the South African border.Meanwhile, back home, the militia came looking for him, burned down his house, seized his wife and child and took them to a war veterans’ base. She was questioned about his whereabouts, but knew nothing.The escapees found a hole in the electric fence dividing Zimbabwe and South Africa near Beitbridge border post and crossed the Limpopo River on foot by linking hands to avoid being swept away.Makahamadze made his way to Port Elizabeth, where he worked in the orchards, until he heard about the Scholar Rescue Fund, run by the New York-based Institute of International Education, which provides grants for endangered scholars to relocate to institutions in safe countries. He had to travel into Port Elizabeth to use the Internet but eventually IIE awarded him a fellowship and he joined Chatham University, Pittsburgh, in the United States, where he now teaches modules in international studies about African geopolitics, domestic violence and the relationship between culture and HIV/AIDS prevalence.Makahamadze is in no doubt that this was an attack on education. “I’m an academic and I know I was targeted specifically because of the kind of papers I was writing,” he says. “I wrote another one about the ruinous effects of Operation Muratsvimba – which targeted opposition members – on defenceless people, particularly Johane Marange Apostolic Church. And that’s education. “In Zimbabwe, if you are in any education and you don’t dance to the tune of the ruling party, it means you are an enemy of the state and you can be abducted,” he says.153

153 Tompson Makahamdze, interview with the author, November 2009.

