
PART I — GLOBAL OveRvIeW

Accountability
Perpetrators of attacks must be held responsible, where appropriate, in domestic, regional and international
fora through judicial and non-judicial mechanisms. Others who are responsible for putting education at risk of
attack or for failing to fulfil their responsibility to prevent or respond to attacks should also be held to account.
• States should, in accordance with international standards, systematically investigate and, where appropriate, prosecute those individuals responsible for ordering, taking part in, or bearing command
responsibility for, the range of violations of international law that constitute attacks against education.
• Tribunals at regional and international levels should similarly give specific consideration to the range of
violations that constitute attacks against education during relevant investigations and pursue and
prosecute cases of sufficient gravity over which they have jurisdiction. When considering awards of
reparation, tribunals should consider the full effect of such attacks.
• Informal and transitional justice mechanisms, such as commissions of inquiry and truth and reconciliation commissions, should, where relevant, recognize and concretely address attacks against education
at all stages in their processes, including in fact-finding and any reparations.

Protective programmes, policies and planning
In areas where attacks occur, implementing effective measures to prevent, respond to and mitigate the impacts
of attacks is critical. All interventions should be tailored to context and conflict dynamics and, where possible,
should be based on assessment and evaluation of what works and why.
• Governments, NGOs and UN agencies should involve communities, including marginalized and
vulnerable groups, in analysing the nature of attacks, as well as programme design and delivery.
Community engagement should not come at the expense of community members’ safety.
• Donors should ensure flexibility in both programme design and funding to allow for interventions to be
tailored to context and to change course as needed.
• UN agencies, NGOs and relevant ministries should undertake conflict analysis to avoid unintentionally
increasing or transferring risk.
• UN agencies, NGOs and education ministries should pay particular attention to the impact of violent
attacks on girls’ and women’s education and devise appropriate programmes of prevention, response
and recovery.
• UN agencies, NGOs, peacekeeping forces and governments, where appropriate and where security
concerns allow, should undertake negotiations with parties to a conflict, or support such negotiations, to
reach agreement on respect for schools as safe sanctuaries and the re-opening of closed schools.
• States should take steps towards de-linking education facilities, staff and students from electoral tasks
and partisan political events in contexts where it can be reasonably expected that such linkages would
heighten the risk of attacks.
• Education ministries should adopt conflict-sensitive curricula and resourcing policies to ensure that
education does not help trigger conflict and become a target for attack.

