
A chair dangles precariously in a bomb-damaged school in Gaza following Operation Cast Lead, 2009.© Joe Hironaka




Research into attacks on schools and universities is still at an early stage. Many aspects of this multi-faceted phenomenon have attracted little attention, and there is much scope for more extensive investigation and deeper analysis. So far, for instance, very little research has been carried out into why particular armed groups regard schools or even schoolchildren as legitimate targets and why so many governments persecute academics in their own universities. Almost no research has been carried out on the impact of repeated attacks on education systems, as opposed to individuals and buildings. And research into the effectiveness of protective measures and negotiations with armed groups is very limited. Reporting of education-related attacks was pioneered in certain countries by organizations such as Human Rights Watch, and internationally, by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict. The launch of Education under Attack (2007) put the issue on the international agenda as a distinct subject. Since then, the importance of defending education has been reinforced at a series of international meetings and conferences, and most notably by the debate on Education in Emergencies at the United Nations General Assembly on 18 March 2009, where Asha-Rose Migiro, UN Deputy Secretary-General, said: “Protecting children and teachers is a moral imperative as well as a matter of international law”.There is now a growing putative movement of UN agencies, international and national NGOs, and experts concerned with education, human rights, child protection and international law who have taken an interest in this subject. They are searching for ways to ensure that parties in conflicts respect schools as sanctuaries and zones of peace and that those who perpetrate attacks are pursued, prosecuted and punished. The web of interest needs to be widened further to draw in military leaders and ministers who have a say in the conduct of conflicts and therefore an important role to play in the protection of education from attack. In the meantime, Education under Attack 2010 takes a deeper look at the nature and extent of the problem today and its impact on education and fragility; and highlights opportunities for positive action to be taken in the years to come.

