
They also tried to burn down the school
buildings.385
• In South Ossetia, Georgia in 2008, a kindergarten teacher reported to Human Rights Watch
that volunteer militias had been hiding in her
kindergarten and that Georgian government
forces had attacked the building with
rockets.386
As the preceding analysis shows, educational facilities are used regularly by armed forces in various
ways. While temporary physical occupation is the
most widely reported form of military use, other overt
and indirect forms of use are common. There are
instances where schools and universities are being
used militarily and educationally at the same time; in
other circumstances, military use spells the end of all
educational activities. In either case, the effects of
military use on education functions are typically
adverse.
The negative consequences of military use are many
and various. Students and teachers come under fire
and are often exposed to physical injury and sexual
violence. Students drop out of school or are removed
by worried parents who are frightened about the risks
to which their children are exposed. School and
university buildings are damaged and destroyed –
both by attacks precipitated by their use and by the
actions of armed forces and groups using them – with
many being altered in some way to make them even
more suitable for military use. Course notes,
textbooks, classroom furniture and a great deal of
other educational material are damaged or lost.
Students, teachers and support staff may suffer
trauma when schools are attacked; merely the fear of
attack can undermine the feeling of security that is
necessary for a good teaching and learning
environment. Schools and universities that are used
by the military while carrying on their educational
function become overcrowded; there are consequential lower rates of enrolment; the quality of
education that is still delivered declines; and the
presence of soldiers can seriously undermine general
personal security, with girls and women being
especially vulnerable.

EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

Provision of security for educational
institutions
Not all forms of military interaction with education are
motivated purely by military imperatives, nor are they
necessarily negative in their impact. Schools and
universities in conflict zones are in need of security
and protection. Their administrators and military
commanders may judge it necessary for military
personnel to guard them. Military commanders with a
specific mandate to protect civilians as part of a
humanitarian mission, for example, may well regard
school security as an essential mission objective.
Education institutions damaged in war may need
rebuilding and essential services may need to be
restored. Military units could be physically capable of
providing the sort of support necessary to maintain
the infrastructure vital for schools to operate effectively. Indeed, military personnel may be the only
source of such support during conflict and its
immediate aftermath.
There is, however, a fundamental dilemma to be
faced. Military personnel providing the support and
security necessary for a school to function could
compromise that school’s status and lead to it
becoming a target for opposing military forces. This
may be the case even when a military force is acting in
a conflict zone under a humanitarian mandate. The
provision of support by the military could have exactly
the opposite effect of that intended.
Whether military interaction with education is essentially for military purposes or for the apparent benefit
of education itself, it is important that military
commanders are aware of the serious dilemmas that
result. Their decisions should be consistent with the
need to mitigate the impact of conflict on education.
Clearly, those decisions need to be informed by an
understanding of the relevant legal rights and obligations; military action must remain within legal limits. It
is also desirable, however, to do more to protect
education than the minimum required by the law. Any
military interaction with education should be reduced
as much as possible to maximize the benefit to
education and to minimize the damage to it.

Options for changing behaviour
Changing military behaviour, especially in order to
impose additional constraints on military activity, is a
major challenge. The use of educational establishments is a sorry feature of modern warfare. What the
law demands is known and it is vitally important that
all fighting forces, both those belonging to states and
those making up armed non-state groups, are sufficiently well-disciplined and trained to comply. Even if
the law as it stands were to be fully complied with,
however, it would not result in education obtaining the
degree of protection it deserves and requires. Even
lawful behaviour by fighting forces can result in
serious damage to education. Better behaviour than
the current law demands is therefore needed.
A change in the law might be one way forward. Would
an education-specific treaty or convention be a
sensible step and could the process of achieving this
be initiated by a coalition of international organizations and NGOs rooted in civil society? There is
evidence that the contemporary normative climate is
becoming increasingly conducive to civil societyinspired changes to the law governing the conduct of
hostilities and the development of means and
methods of warfare. Both the Ottawa and Oslo
processes, on anti-personnel landmines and cluster
munitions respectively, were initiated by civil society
groups, as was the process resulting in the UN negotiations for an Arms Trade Treaty, successfully
concluded in early 2013. A convention restricting
military use of schools and universities is, therefore, a
serious option to consider.
The need to persuade states formally to engage in
negotiations and then agree to be bound by resultant
treaty provisions may, however, be a challenge too far.
Such an approach is likely to result in many powerful
or influential states either distancing themselves from
the process of negotiation or engaging with the
intention of preventing progressive rules that would
impose more constraints on military forces. Many
states would simply argue that the protection of
education is already adequately provided for in
existing treaty law. The risk is that states would not be
willing to commit in law to a more restrictive set of
rules even if they might be prepared generally to adopt

