
required major rehabilitation or reconstruction. It is
not known for how many years during the conflict
those particular schools were out of use but the
figures suggest that entire cohorts of children in many
areas missed out on between three and 13 years of
schooling.117
In those schools that do continue to operate after
attacks or threats of attack, the quality of the
education provided and the quality of the learning
experienced may be greatly reduced. A commonly
reported problem is teachers fleeing the area or giving
up their jobs. Similarly, students may be withdrawn
from school or not sent back to school because of
parental fears for their safety. Attacks on schools and
recruitment from schools may also be a reason for

EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

families or communities uprooting and seeking a
place of safety.
Destruction of infrastructure may lead to overcrowding
in remaining classrooms and may put children at risk
in unsafe learning environments if damage has not
been repaired or schools and school grounds not
cleared of unexploded ordnance and other dangerous
objects. Some schools may be forced to organize
double shifts to accommodate students from other
schools that have been damaged, reducing the
number of classroom hours and subjecting facilities to
additional wear-and-tear. Looting and damage of
classroom materials may leave students without
textbooks and other items that facilitate learning,
further affecting the quality of education.
Where schools are damaged the quality of education
provided will be lowered, and that impact will last for
all the time that the schools are not repaired. For
example, in Gaza, according to the Ministry of
Education, none of the 280 schools damaged
(including 18 completely destroyed) in the Israeli
military incursion that ended in January 2009 had
been repaired by February 2010 because an Israeli
blockade prevented construction materials from
entering the territory.118 The effects of the damage
therefore continued for at least one year after the
damage occurred.
In addition, students and staff may experience
prolonged psychological distress, ranging from
distraction to trauma, that impairs their ability to study
or teach to their full potential, as is the case with
students who witness other acts of violence in conflict.
A 2009 field study in Yemen found that 54 per cent of
1,100 children surveyed had had nightmares after
witnessing conflict in their schools or villages, 35 per
cent had been aggressive towards their relatives or
peers, 22 per cent had considered dropping out of
school and 22 per cent were prone to bed-wetting or
unconscious urination.119
Military use of schools not only makes them a target
for attack, but leads to degradation of facilities and
furniture. Where classes are ongoing, students and
teachers are put at risk from attacks or crossfire or the
presence of weapons and are vulnerable to
misconduct by troops and security forces, including

sexual advances. In many cases, parents withdraw
their children from school – and girls are typically the
first to be kept at home. Where they do not, dual use of
the facilities can lead to overcrowding and a lowered
quality of education provided, particularly where
military use lasts for long periods120 – for example,
some schools were occupied for three years in India.121
Repeated attacks, and the associated security threat,
can challenge the capacity of the state to manage or
provide education services – ranging from paying
teachers and rebuilding or re-supplying education
facilities to holding examinations and inspecting
schools. Recurrent attacks undermine or halt social
and economic development, for which education is a
key enabling provision, and can threaten the stability
of particular villages, regions or even whole states,
undermining government control of the country. This
may be a key reason why schools are systematically
attacked in some countries.122 The destruction of
schools in Pakistan was seen as a powerful symbol of
the Pakistani Taliban insurgents’ ability to operate in
the border areas with impunity, thereby undermining
people’s sense of the government’s ability to assure
their safety. A Pakistani Taliban campaign of assassination of anyone seen to be helping rebuild schools
hampered the recovery effort.123
Due to the interdependence and interconnectedness
of the various components of an education system,
attacks on higher education communities and institutions have an impact on all levels of education and
society. As with attacks at other levels of education,
they put students’ and academics’ lives and liberty at
grave risk, as well as those of their families, and may
also cause falling enrolment, withdrawal from
education and flight of teaching staff. The effects of
attacks can be devastating for research and teaching
because they trigger retreat, fear and flight and may
silence a whole academic community. Attacks on
higher education can also limit the subjects that can
be studied or researched, restrict international collaboration and undermine the university as a learning
institution. They have wider consequences for society,
too, in restricting development, particularly the
emergence or strengthening of political plurality,
accountable government and open democracy.

