



schools, providing distance learning where it is too dangerous to attend classes, relocating schools within community homes to make them less visible targets, and providing rapid repair and resupply of educational materials.Capacity-building is needed to help countries improve their protection and recovery measures.Since 2007, the case for involving communities in the running and defence of schools and in negotiations over the re-opening of schools has been strengthened by research and a successful initiative in Afghanistan. Community defence initiatives have been encouraged in Afghanistan since June 2006 and involve mobilizing local people to deter or resist attacks. School protection shura (councils) have been established where school management committees did not exist. The CARE study, Knowledge on Fire, which involved more than a thousand field interviews, found that in two provinces, Balkh and Khost, 12 per cent of people said attacks had been prevented.10 Some communities had negotiated with the potential attackers or gained “permission” to continue teaching. Others had banned strangers from entering their village, hired night guards, or patrolled schools themselves when threats were issued. In some cases, they fought with attackers.The CARE research suggests that where there is clear community involvement in the running of community affairs, the schools or their defence, schools seem less likely to be attacked and negotiated prevention seems more achievable. For instance, villages with a Community Development Council reported far fewer attacks on schools. In the cases analysed, measures taken by the community seem to have sent a strong message that the schools are “for the people and not for the government”, so should not be targeted as a symbol of government. By contrast, where schools were built without the community requesting them, or rebuilt by international forces, they were thought more likely to be attacked.Similarly, negotiations to re-open 161 schools in southern Afghanistan that had remained closed due to the threat of attacks succeeded because they addressed the feelings shared by the community and the armed opposition, the Taliban, that schools were imposing alien (anti-Islamic) values.Afghanistan’s Minister of Education, Farooq Wardak, appointed in late 2008, first encouraged religious and village leaders to mobilize support among local people for the re-opening of schools. He then invited influential local people from across the 

10 Glad, Knowledge on Fire.

