



Short- and long-term impactsThe physical effects of the bombing, shelling and burning of school and university buildings include loss of life and injury, as well as the loss of places in which to learn, learning materials, equipment and school furniture, research materials, computer data, management information systems, specialist laboratories, and transport vehicles. Much harder to measure are the psychological effects of the murder, disappearance and torture of students, teachers and other staff and the destruction of institutions that are supposed to be protective. Such effects can include trauma, fear, insecurity, demotivation and despondency. Public knowledge of repeated incidents and threats of attack gleaned from word of mouth or the media can spread fear throughout a region. Typically, children will be afraid to go to school, parents will be afraid to send them and teachers will be afraid to go to work. Where incidents occur, schools may be closed in tens or hundreds for anything from a week to months or even years, in some cases. In Afghanistan, 670 schools remained closed in March 2009, denying education to 170,000 children. In Pakistan, the Taliban’s ban on girls’ classes, issued in Swat District in December 2008, led to the closure of 900 state and private schools, depriving 120,000 girls of their right to education. In the longer term, governments may be reluctant to re-open, repair or resupply schools until threats have passed. They will struggle to recruit new teachers in areas where teachers are targeted for assassination, with serious consequences for the quality and number of staff recruited. Attacks on aid workers can lead to the removal of aid workers from a given area or even the country, with the loss of expertise and supplies that came with them. 

A boy covers his face after returning to his damaged school in Batticaloa District, Eastern Province, Sri Lanka, in 2007. The school was evacuated when the Sri Lankan Government and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) forces, a separatist guerrilla group, exchanged fire in the area.© UNICEFNYHQ2007-2638/Ron Haviv

