



more could be done to help academics in exile to continue their work for the Iraqi education system and be ready to come back when the situation stabilizes.  “This has to become one of the concerns of the international community, to give academics who are leaving the chance to be accepted in other countries and continue doing their work, so they can be ready to go back,” Djelid says, “rather than treating them as refugees with no rights.” In Afghanistan, UNICEF is helping local people set up smaller school units closer to or within communities, even inside homes. “Whenever schools are attacked, if people are fearful of going back, they can always fall back on the smaller units,” says Cream Wright, head of education at UNICEF, “and because we are working with the communities in doing this, they have a stake in defending their schools and the sort of mini-neighbourhood gathering places that can serve as schools as well.”88Taking education out of traditional buildings is not so radical an idea in Afghanistan, since at least 2 million children already go to schools that do not have any walls - they learn either in tents or the open air. Also, in some areas the education gap is being plugged by voluntary schools run by parateachers (who get some training on the job each year), located in a large room in a villager’s house. These are far harder for outsiders to track down and are more easily watched over. Furthermore, there is a history of going underground and teaching children secretly at home, a tactic used successfully when the Taliban were in power and banned school for girls. In Afghanistan, home-schooling, following the government primary curriculum, achieves double the completion rates of government schooling at a cheaper cost (US$18 per pupil per year compared to US$31) and 90 per cent of students pass end-of-year exams.89 But that may be a reﬂ ection on the paucity of trained staff and resources in government schools.Another way to maintain resilience in the face of attacks is to ensure a rapid response in their aftermath. UNICEF has a target of being ready to visit the locations of any attacks within 72 hours and being ready to provide classroom tents, teaching and learning materials, and ﬂ oor mats within 5 days to speed up the return to learning.

88 Telephone interview with Brendan O’Malley, 20 March 2007.89 Rebecca Winthrop, 2006, Forced Migration Review Education Supplement, ‘Emergencies, Education and Innovation’.

