



The investigation into the Darfur situation was opened on 6 June 2005. Since then, three cases have been brought before the Court:The Prosecutor v. Ahmad Muhammad Harun and Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman (Ali Kushayb);The Prosecutor v. Omar Hassan Ahmad Al Bashir; and The Prosecutor v. Bahr Idriss Abu Garda. The suspects from the first two cases remain at large, while the suspect in the third case has appeared before the Court.With respect to “attacks on education”, Bashir has been charged with multiple attacks that took place from March 2003 to 14 July 2008 as part of the counter-insurgency campaign. These were attacks on the civilian population of Darfur, belonging largely to the Fur, Massalit and Zaghawa groups, and attacks included the bombing of schools, where children made up a large proportion of victims. The Central African RepublicThe situation in the Central African Republic was referred to the ICC by the country’s authorities in December 2004. The investigations opened in May 2007. An arrest warrant was issued against Jean-Pierre Bemba, who was arrested on 24 May 2008 in Brussels, Belgium. On 15 June 2009, Pre-Trial Chamber II partially confirmed the charges: Bemba is accused of rape and killing as war crimes and crimes against humanity, and pillaging as a war crime. His trial was due to start in late 2009. Massive sexual violence is a distinctive feature of this case, including against children: many have been raped, even gang raped, often in public and/or in the presence of relatives.Additionally, the OTP continues to closely monitor allegations of crimes committed in the Central African Republic since the end of 2005 and whether any national investigation and prosecution has been, or is being, conducted with respect to crimes potentially falling under the Court’s jurisdiction.Children have been identified as primary victims of the conflict that erupted in the Central African Republic toward the end of 2005, and are estimated to account for half of the internally displaced population. Reports indicate that various armed groups operating in the Central African Republic continue to recruit and use children. There have also been reports of other grave violations against children, including killing, maiming, and attacks on schools. 

