
PART II — THeMATIC eSSAYS

Conclusions and ways forward
As the above analysis demonstrates, possible
measures for the protection of higher education and
prevention of future attacks are wide-ranging and
each has strengths and limitations. Success is likely to
be highly context-sensitive and case-specific. More
research is clearly needed to improve knowledge and
awareness and further develop strategies on this
issue. This review suggests the need for caution in
generalizing findings and positing global solutions,
particularly when so little rigorous research is
available that maps the dynamics of attacks on higher
education in relation to mechanisms of protection,
prevention and accountability.
Nevertheless, immediate short-term steps can be
taken to increase protection and help prevent future
attacks. These could include increased support for the
monitoring of attacks on higher education. Analysis of
the problem of attacks on higher education points to
the lack of systematic documentation, and an absence
of a mechanism that specifically and exclusively
monitors and reports on attacks (nature, scope,
motives, patterns, frequency) and of international and
national protection responses. One important aspect
of this would be to gather data on attacks on university
students more systematically. Such data are worryingly absent from what little documentation exists.
Students unions and their collective organizations,
unlike academic staff organizations, often lack the
institutional infrastructure and resources to gather
data on attacks on members of their community.
These efforts could also be linked to awareness and
advocacy campaigns on attacks against students, and
lend support for the setting up of protection measures
for targeted or at-risk students similar to those
available to at-risk academics (temporary exile
strategies, etc.).
Mechanisms could also be developed to improve
emergency protection measures available to higher
education institutions and communities. In countries
with a high prevalence of attacks on higher education
institutions, efforts could be undertaken to raise
security awareness among students, academics and
administrators and other staff, for example, through
training workshops, and to develop a tailored security

