



and UNICEF do not always match.62 Both systems face the risk of double-counting episodes due to lack of exact data related to the names of schools and locations, or lack of information regarding the date of incidents, according to the study. There are clear examples of such double-counting in both databases. In addition, in some cases several incidents that happen on the same day are mistakenly considered as one attack.63Quite different models of collection exist, which affect the extent of coverage geographically and across time, as well as data accuracy. Some organizations, such as Human Rights Watch, carry out one-off in-depth studies on particular conflicts at a particular time, which may include sections on attacks on education. It has published two reports focusing solely on education attacks (in Afghanistan and India). It has also published many reports with a sole or strong focus on recruitment of child soldiers and sexual violence, and has a strong track record on disseminating them effectively via the media. Human Rights Watch reports are often based on field interviews with hundreds of officials and witnesses. For example, the 2008 report, Dangerous Duty: Children and the Chhattisgarh Conflict, is based on research in four districts in two states over four months. The NGO interviewed 235 people, including villagers, Salwa Judum (anti-Naxalite militia) camp residents, police, Special Police Officers and former child Naxalites in Chhattisgarh State, lawyers, journalists, and NGO representatives.The largest published field study in the reporting period - apparently the only large-scale study dedicated solely to attacks on education - is the CARE study, conducted in Afghanistan, entitled Knowledge on Fire: Attacks on Education in Afghanistan, Risks and Mitigatory Measures (2009), which was commissioned by the World Bank and written by Marit Glad. Its preparation included a desk study of existing reports, literature and data, plus data collection in eight provinces. The data collection involved 1,037 individual and group interviews, including 559 focus group discussions with teachers, parents, students and shura (Councils of Elders) members.More useful for year-by-year comparisons of data is the establishment of continuous monitoring systems within countries. In Colombia, the Observatory of Human Rights and International Humanitarian Law collects information through a combination of daily monitoring of the main national newspapers and being given official information from governmental bodies including the police, the National Security Department, the Mine Action Program, trade unions and other civil society organizations, such as those representing indigenous and minority groups.

62 Glad, Knowledge on Fire, 12.63 Ibid.

