



This is already the case in Iraq, which used to attract students from all over the region because of the quality of its education. The combination of spiralling general violence and targeted attacks on education appears to have reached a tipping point, bringing the university and school systems to their knees, as students and teachers ﬂ ee the country or simply refuse to brave the streets to attend their courses of study.Fred van Leeuwen, General Secretary of Education International, warned in November 2006 that the killing of teachers and closures of schools in Iraq have contributed to a “dramatic decrease in school attendance rates” and are creating a catastrophic ‘brain drain’ of teachers that will put the future of Iraq at stake. Mohamed Djelid, Director of UNESCO Iraq, said that the number of teachers leaving the country doubled last year. “Automatically it hit the quality of education. It really has become a problem. It is affecting a whole generation of students, not just a few people.”Only 30 per cent of Iraq’s 3.5 million pupils are attending classes, compared to 75 per cent last school year.70 Universities in Baghdad and Basra, meanwhile, are on the verge of collapse.In Sunni areas of Baghdad, schools are emptying as students go to class only a few days a week, if at all. A survey of three Baghdad schools with less than 50 per cent attendance revealed that fear of abduction is the most common reason for staying at home.71Enrolment at Baghdad University’s main campus was down 40 per cent in January 2007. One professor in Mosul said: “In some departments at my institute, attendance is down to a third. In others we have instances of no students turning up at all.”72  The exodus of thousands of teachers and academics is threatening a drastic drop in the quality of tertiary education. University students are reportedly graduating at the same level as a ﬁ rst-year undergraduate during Saddam Hussein’s regime.Increasingly, however, many university students are deciding that graduating at any level is not an option, if it means they have to risk their lives to attend lectures. 

70 Fred van Leeuwen, General Secretary, Education International, 16 November 2006, Letter to President Jalal Talabani of Iraq.71 Damien Cave, New York Times, 29 January 2007, ‘Shell Hits Baghdad Girls School, Killing 5 Students’.72 Peter Beaumont, 5 October 2006, ‘Iraq’s Universities and Schools Near Collapse as Teachers and Pupils Flee’.

