



By analysing the conditions in which academics are most likely to seek rescue from persecution via the Scholar Rescue Fund, Jarecki and Kaisth concluded that countries where the full range of attacks on academics are carried out, from harassment to violent attacks, torture and assassination, appear to have some or all of the following factors in common: low GDP; high level of conflict; small academic population; failed state status; low level of country freedom; and low level of press freedom.208Jarecki and Kaisth warn that not too much should be read into their findings due to the limitations of the size and geographic reach of their database.209 But one interesting insight that merits further research is the suggestion of an increased likelihood of attacks on higher education in fragile states with low levels of democratic freedom. This throws more light on the shortcoming of the assumption by some that attacks on academics who are involved in politics, for instance by researching human rights, proposing alternative political strategies or advising or supporting alternative political movements, are really attacks on politics not education. The development of critical thinking and alternative academic research and opinions on political issues are education’s vital contribution to political progress. And the places where that contribution is restricted by repression or attacks on academics tend to be states where political development is being stymied or sent into reverse.We already know that there are strong correlations between fragility and low access and achievement in primary education: over half of primary-aged children not in school are found in conflict-affected countries, for instance,210 and the World Bank has argued that provision of education, particularly for girls, is the single most effective intervention that countries can make to improve human development. The prevention of attacks on education and the strengthening of the right to education at all levels, therefore, can be viewed as important contributions to tackling conditions of fragility.“Education has always been important in nation-building and teachers and academics have a responsibility, a duty, to be engaged in that. Attacks on education are an attack on the goal of educated citizenry,” says Eastman. At the same time education, especially access to good quality education, is an important factor in promoting peace, stability and hope for better opportunities in the future in the form of development, all of which can help release states from conditions of fragility. Attacks on education, by contrast, undermine that hope of progress.211 

208 Ibid., 65.209 Ibid., 7. 210 Save the Children, “Children in Conflict-Affected Countries Short-Changed in Education Funding,” June 3, 2008. Approximately 37 million of the 72 million children who do not go to primary school live in conflict-affected countries.211 Jan Eastman, interview with the author, August 27, 2009.

