



“Capacity development is not an add-on but must be an integral part of both our crisis prevention efforts and of our response to a crisis,” he said. “Many countries experience chronic and intermittent conflict. Capacity-building improves the skills and confidence of education ministries to act in these situations and to better mitigate their effects”.244Recovery measures for child soldiersThere is now a well-established procedure, developed by the UN, of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) for child soldiers, which aid agencies support. The first stage is often to collect small arms and light and heavy weapons in the conflict zone, which involves assembling combatants and managing the storage or destruction of arms. Demobilization involves the formal and controlled discharge of soldiers from the army or armed group. The process should include establishing the child’s participation in the conflict, collecting information to establish the child’s identity and trace his or her family, and assessing the needs of the child. Reintegration is a long-term process that aims to provide children with a viable alternative to life in the armed group and re-establish them in the community. It may include reuniting them with their family or finding alternative care if that is not possible. It also means providing education and training, offering them help in planning how to make a livelihood and giving psychosocial support, where needed.245 International progress on disarming, demobilizing and reintegrating child soldiers has been achieved with the support of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict’s work, agreed by the UN Security Council, in the listing and monitoring of offending countries and the issuing of time-bound action plans. Recovery measures for victims of sexual violence Psychological trauma; tissue tears in the vagina, bladder and rectum; uterine prolapse; infertility; and sexually transmitted infections including HIV & AIDS are among the painful effects suffered by women and children raped in war, according to research by 

244 Ibid.245 Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers, www.child-soldiers.org.

