



before people have to leave. And we have a few theories about how it can be done,” he says. “But it will involve mobilizing human rights structures, intergovernmental structures to at least make attacks more visible. We also need to raise the political and social cost of attacks in the hope of mitigating them. And the long-term aim is to build a democratic base of support for the university space, a vision of education that will allow people to contribute to their full capacity in society without restriction”.247Negotiating safe sanctuariesThe right to education in safety was enshrined in the expanded commentary of the Dakar Framework for Action resulting from the World Education Forum. Paragraph 58 declares that: “Schools should be respected and protected as sanctuaries and zones of peace”. Education under Attack (2007) reported the suggestion from Save the Children that an international symbol be commissioned to denote that schools are safe sanctuaries and must not be attacked, although some experts argue that having too many such symbols devalues them and others cite important ethical and security concerns about singling out categories of civilians (see Section 9 Monitoring and impunity).Since then, in 2008, the Indian National Commission for Protection of Children’s Rights (NCPCR) has recommended to all parties in the Naxalite conflict that schools should be identified and recognized as “zones of peace”. This would include non-use of schools for anything other than educational purposes, separation of schools from the Salwa Judum, police or Naxalite camps, and introduction of programmes addressing the psychosocial needs of the children in schools via appropriately trained teachers.248The extensive list of attacks in breach of this ideal (see Annex I: Country reports) might seem to offer little hope of either the Dakar commitment or painted symbols having any effect. But experience in Afghanistan of the negotiated re-opening of schools is not the only example of armed groups being persuaded to leave the violence of the conflict outside the school gates.

247 Robert Quinn, interview with the author, September 1, 2009.248 National Commission for the Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR), Visit to Dantewada (Chhattisgarh) and Khammam (Andhra Pradesh) to Investigate Status of Health and Education of Children Affected by Civil Unrest, 17th to 19th December 2007 (NCPCR, 2008), 4, as cited in Human Rights Watch (HRW), “Being Neutral is Our Biggest Crime”: Government, Vigilante, and Naxalite Abuses in India’s Chhattisgarh State (New York: HRW, 2008).

