



UNICEF asks the education authorities and religious leaders to talk to people to see what can be done to get the schools cleared and re-opened. UNICEF also coordinates with UNHCR to provide plastic sheeting for IDPs to use as shelters so that they can leave the school. “Very often in an emergency, schools act as welcome centres for IDPs. When they arrive they need shelters - that is why they occupy schools. But they are not staying because they want to stay in schools. They have no other choice,” says Sayo Aoki, former UNICEF education specialist in Goma.240UNICEF often speaks to schools and parent committees to negotiate local solutions, which can be successful, while sometimes OCHA acts as a mediator. In one case, a school occupied by rebels was evacuated after negotiations with OCHA. In another, a school occupied by the army was evacuated after negotiations led by a School Directors and Parents’ Committee.241In Goma, UNICEF has been operating a pilot project since October 2007 to provide Mobile Teacher Support Teams, which help local schools integrate displaced children. The programme tries to raise the quality of learning by providing teacher training, increasing community participation and organizing catch-up classes for children who missed schooling through displacement or insecurity. So far, it has supported 85 host schools catering for 46,000 children, 36 per cent of them IDPs. Ninety per cent of children scored passing grades at the end of the school year, an important achievement given that 85 per cent of children who do not pass at the first attempt drop out of school.242Internationally, recovery measures from attacks should improve with the increased weight being given to education in emergencies. According to Nicholas Burnett, formerly of UNESCO, this requires a strengthening of collaboration and capacity-building in the humanitarian response to crises, which tends to suffer from lack of coordination between the many actors. At the UN General Assembly debate on Education in Emergencies in March 2009, Burnett praised the acceptance of the application of the cluster process, through which agencies coordinate their response to humanitarian situations, to education in 2006. But he warned that a “major shortcoming” remained in the limited role often given to national partners in the reconstruction process.243

240 Sayo Aoki, interview with the author, June 2009.241 Ibid.; and information supplied by UNICEF Eastern Congo Zonal Office – Goma.242 Ibid.243 Nicholas Burnett, Assistant Director-General for Education, UNESCO (panel address, UN General Assembly Interactive Thematic Dialogue on Access to Education in Emergency, Post-Crisis and Transition Situations Caused by Man-Made Conflicts or Natural Disasters, New York, March 18, 2009).

