



by legitimizing brutality via the ballot box. It concluded that Mugabe was a liability. Makahamadze presented it at the university in November 2007. “The constitution of Zimbabwe clearly states that Zimbabweans are free to express themselves and we believe that we should express ourselves as scholars,” he says.But the title of the paper drew him to the attention of ZANU-PF officials, war veterans and Green Bombers (ZANU-PF youth militia) in Masvingo.Academic freedom is limited in a country where universities are populated by large numbers of Green Bombers and infiltrated by government intelligence (CIO) officers who monitor dissent.The two academics were reported to the vice chancellor, who summoned them separately to find out if a secret organization was behind their work. Makahamadze was warned to be careful or he would find himself in “Siberia”. He interpreted this to mean that he would disappear, never to be seen again, as had happened to a number of his friends.In fact, Zhou, along with eight other PTUZ members, was later beaten and tortured in ZANU-PF offices in Harare in February 2008. In a chamber with bloodstained walls, they were beaten with wooden logs and iron bars by teams of men. Two of the victims, who were female, were sexually abused, with logs forced into their genital area.152When Mugabe campaigned openly in the March 2008 presidential election, Makahamadze thought he had nothing to fear, that Mugabe would be swept away in the democratic vote. But ZANU-PF withheld the results to force a run-off, amid widespread allegations of vote rigging, and the war veterans and the youth militia were ordered by the army to collect names of those who had openly opposed Mugabe. In September 2008, Makahamadze learned from a reliable source that war veterans who had attended the presentation of his paper had put his name on a hit list of opponents to be eliminated. He was warned to save himself before it was too late.“Those on the list were supposed to be killed,” he says. “They wanted to silence the opposition parties and wait for the next election”.

152 Anna Bruce-Lockhart, “Tortured by Mugabe’s Men,” The Guardian Weekly, June 24, 2008.

