
• Based on the initial mapping, determine the
appropriate level of community engagement in
all phases of project development, implementation, monitoring and evaluation. Use varied
methods to engage all community members,
including those from marginalized groups, so
as not to exacerbate any existing tensions.
• Ensure that staff have the relevant cultural
knowledge and background and are accepted
as neutral parties.
• Consider long-term sustainability to ensure that
risk to education does not return once the
programme ends. Long-term programming,
with due consideration for sustainability, is
vital when seeking community engagement in
activities. For interventions like community
schools, this may include lobbying the relevant
line ministries to support the training of paraprofessionals, integrate them into the formal
system, endorse the curricula and strengthen
facilities.

EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

Mario Novelli and Ervjola Selenica

social cohesion. Consequently, such attacks must be
challenged with greater rigour and resources.

Protecting higher education
from attack

For the purpose of this essay, an attack on higher
education, as with attacks on other levels of
education, is defined as any threat or deliberate use of
force, carried out for political, military, ideological,
sectarian, ethnic or religious reasons, against higher
education institutions, administrators, academic and
other staff, or students. These include acts of intentional violence resulting in damage or destruction of
institutions or facilities, or physical harm or death to
individuals. They also include deliberate acts of
coercion, intimidation or threats of physical force that
create a climate of fear and repression that undermines academic freedom and educational functions.
The definition, however, does not include non-violent
infringement of academic freedom or discrimination in
hiring, promotion or admission.303

While there is a growing body of work investigating the scale, nature and impact of attacks
on children and schools, far less attention has
been placed on attacks on higher education,
and still less on the protection and prevention
measures that are being or could be taken. The
lack of research and the limited attention given
to developing and implementing such measures
represent a serious omission on the part of the
international community, as the higher
education sector has a vital role to play not only
in scientific progress but in political, economic,
social and cultural progress too, including in
the development and provision of primary and
secondary education. This chapter explores why
attacks on higher education occur and how they
might be prevented or their impact reduced. A
starting point would be to invest in evidencegathering and advocacy aimed at increasing
accountability, as well as in strengthening
emergency protection and prevention measures
Higher education is a public good. The university
sector throughout the world has a complex and multifaceted role in developing human capital vital for
scientific, political, economic, social and cultural
progress. This includes developing pedagogy and
providing future teachers for schools; acting as a point
of critical reflection on national development;
preparing young adults to become active citizens and
future leaders; and offering a potentially autonomous
space, independent of state, capital, religion and
society, where key issues can be debated and
solutions developed through evidence-based
discourse. Attacks on this sector amount to attacks on
all levels of education, as well as on intellectual,
cultural and economic heritage, political stability and

Attacks on higher education communities have been
documented in armed conflicts, but many also occur
under repressive regimes where armed conflict may
not be present.304 Indeed, some of the most damaging
attacks on higher education happen in situations
where universities and their academics and students
are perceived by repressive authorities as a ‘threat’ in
a way that schools, teachers and pupils typically are
not. As a result, they may be at heightened risk of
individual attacks or campaigns comprising multiple
attacks over an extended period, whether aimed at the
isolation and persecution of a single target or the
intimidation of the higher education community as a
whole.
In this essay, we look at why attacks on higher
education occur and the impact of such attacks before
considering how they might be deterred or prevented
and how, once they occur, they might be addressed.
The chapter concludes with a brief synopsis of the core
arguments and their implications, highlighting
knowledge gaps and pointing towards areas for future
research and policy development.

Motives for attacks on higher education
The motives for attacks on higher education are
multiple and they vary within and across contexts.
Academics and higher education students can be

