



In 2005, the Special Representative reported that more than 250,000 children continued to be exploited as child soldiers. The recruitment or use of child soldiers was continuing in the period November 2005 to September 2006 in Burundi, Chad, Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Cote d’Ivoire, Myanmar, Nepal, the Philippines, Somalia, the Sudan, and Sri Lanka. Abductions of children were continuing in Chad, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Nepal, Sri Lanka, the Sudan and Uganda.31The Special Representative’s remit does not go beyond children, so does not address the important question of attacks on teachers, academics and education ofﬁ cials. The monitoring of attacks on schools was established only last year, so it is in an early stage of development. The Ofﬁ ce has supplied only limited or anecdotal information on attacks on educational institutions relating to a handful of countries so far including Afghanistan, Burundi, Cote d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Nepal, the Palestinian Autonomous Territories and Sri Lanka. There is no information in a form that could be used in a database to look at trends emerging across countries, even though attacks on schools are a category of war crime. Of all the countries looked at in detail for this study, the most comprehensive ﬁ gures on attacks on education are available for Nepal, provided by the Informal Sector Service Centre (INSEC),32 a human rights NGO dedicated to systematically documenting and disseminating human rights situation and violation records, aided by 75 human rights reporters, one in each district of the country. This may offer an effective model of data collection that could be replicated in other countries.If the international community wishes to address the problem of violent attacks on education, it must support the development of an independent system of monitoring attacks in a common form across countries so that trends in the scale and types of attacks, the perpetrators and targets, and where possible, the motives, can be analysed and made public. The impact on education provision and the measures that are being taken to prevent attacks and limit their impact should also be monitored and the knowledge shared across conﬂ ict-affected countries and internationally.

31 UN Secretary-General, 26 October 2006, ‘Children and Armed Conﬂ ict’, Annexes I and II (A/61/529 S/2006/826).32 www.inseconline.org/aboutinsec.php.

