



is provided by the Memorial Institute for the Prevention of Terrorism (MIPT)28 and draws on data from the RAND Terrorism Chronology and RAND-MIPT Terrorism Incident Databases, the Terrorism Indictment database, and DFI International’s research on terrorist organizations. It is funded by the United States Department for Homeland Security. The TKB suggests that the countries suffering the highest number of attacks on educational institutions since 1998 are Iraq and Thailand, followed by Afghanistan and Nepal, then Pakistan, Colombia, India, Turkey and Spain. It indicates that the number of attacks on educational institutions has been rising at ever increasing rates since 2000, with a doubling of the number of incidents in 2004 and a six-fold increase on the 2003 ﬁ gure in both 2005 and 2006. It also reports a quadrupling of the number of education fatalities per year in 2004 and this year (2007) there are ominous signs that worse is to come. In the ﬁ rst half of January 2007, there were 72 fatalities and 171 injuries in ﬁ ve terrorist attacks on education institutions, more deaths and injuries than in any other sector affected by terrorism.The TKB ﬁ gures are limited by two factors, however. One is the database’s narrow focus on acts of terrorism, deﬁ ned as “violence, or the threat of violence, calculated to create an atmosphere of fear and alarm”, perpetrated by rebel or subversive groups. They do not cover violence by the state or occupying forces, for instance where schools are closed by force or destroyed as part of a strategy of undermining the culture or infrastructure of a resistant or rebel ethnic or religious minority. The TKB ﬁ gures could therefore cover attacks on schools by the Taliban and allied rebel forces in Afghanistan today, but not the Taliban’s use of state force to ban millions of girls from going to school and women from teaching when the Taliban was in power in Kabul. Yet women caught teaching were hanged, imprisoned or beaten for fulﬁ lling children’s fundamental human right to education, a violent use of state power for illegitimate aims. Nor do they cover acts of torture or forced recruitment 

28 MIPT is funded by the United States Department of Homeland Security and was set up as a non-proﬁ t organization in the wake of the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995. Its function, as directed by the United States Congress, is to research the social and political causes and effects of terrorism.

19© UNICEF/HQ05-1367/Laura Shanaeva

Russian Federation: A school yearbook picture of a young victim.




of child soldiers, both serious offences against education and, in the case of the latter, a widespread problem.29 There are other limitations common to all sources, which must be addressed to aid the development of effective international and domestic strategies for dealing with attacks. These include the lack of data or lack of full access to data, as well as questions of political bias of data from one side or the other in a conﬂ ict. The usefulness of media reports may be limited by their ad hoc nature and bias towards the language of the media outlet, which may mean reporters are not able to cover victims on one side of the conﬂ ict as easily as on the other. The accuracy of media and government reporting may suffer from lack of access to more rural and remote areas or lack of local data and reporting in areas of high illiteracy, which may equate to areas on one side of the conﬂ ict. In Afghanistan, for instance, attacks on schools are more frequent in rural areas off the main roads. Figures provided by a Ministry of Education or union organization may also not be objective, depending on the nature of their involvement in the conﬂ ict. A third problem in collecting data is being able to determine whether an attack is targeted. For instance, if a bus carrying police guards and teachers is hit, were the police the target or the teachers – or both? In many cases, there may be insufﬁ cient evidence to decide.Finding data on the use of child soldiers is also problematic. A Chatham House report last year said that there remained a “disturbing lack of information about the involvement and impact of conﬂ ict on children in both Sri Lanka and Nepal”. No studies had been conducted to ascertain the actual number of children in the ranks of the Tamil Tigers in Sri Lanka or the Maoist forces in Nepal.30One organization charged by the UN Security Council with monitoring grave violations of children’s rights is the Ofﬁ ce of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children in Armed Conﬂ ict. Its monitoring remit includes attacks on schools, recruitment of child soldiers, forced child labour and serious sexual offences against children, which it covers mainly by providing situation reports from missions to priority countries. However, it does not collect detailed or standardized data that can be compared between countries and the main emphasis of reporting so far has been on child soldiers, with less attention paid to attacks on schools. It also concentrates on a handful of priority countries.

29 Saira Shah, 2001, Channel 4, United Kingdom, ‘Beneath the Veil’.30 Charu Lata Hogg, Chatham House/Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers, 2006, Child Recruitment in South Asian Conﬂ icts: A Comparative Analysis of Sri Lanka, Nepal and Bangladesh.

