
CASE EXAMPLE: In the eastern part of Myanmar,
conflict between armed non-state actors and state
armed forces resulted in burning of schools, forced
relocation, and abduction and recruitment of children
on their way to school. Because strict government
controls blocked international access to conflictaffected areas, communities responded entirely
alone. They frequently rebuilt schools or provided
education in temporary facilities during displacement.
Local organizations monitored the incidence of
attacks and conducted advocacy. These efforts were
initiated and maintained without external support.261
2. Community-implemented: Groups external to the
community design these interventions but rely on
community members to manage, support or resource
activities. The assumption is that community volunteerism will maintain actions beyond the life of the
project when external funding ends.
CASE EXAMPLES: School management committees in
DRC variously initiated by UN agencies, NGOs and the
Ministry of Education fall into this category. In
Afghanistan, community guards, initially supported by
the government, became the responsibility of communities themselves in many locations.
3. Community-inspired: Community groups conceive
or develop these actions but rely upon some form of
external support (human resources, skills, knowledge,
advocacy or funding).
CASE EXAMPLE: Malala Yousafzai’s campaign for girls’
education may be seen as ‘community-inspired’
action. She and the community in which she lived may
not have been able to raise the same level of
awareness without collaboration with international
media and UN agencies.
4. Community-involved: In these activities, external
organizations, donors or governments use participatory processes to solicit community perspectives to
shape the design, monitoring and evaluation of the

EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

programme, but implementation is not in the
community’s hands. Actions continue as long as the
external funding stream is available. This often occurs
in rapid onset emergencies, when international
agencies have access to the affected population and
support education as a short-term gap-filling
measure.
CASE EXAMPLE: During the post-election violence in
Côte d’Ivoire in 2011, armed groups attacked large
numbers of villages, causing forced displacement,
and used schools. In response, NGOs set up
temporary learning spaces in camp settings.262 The
speed at which programmes providing temporary
learning spaces are established may limit the level of
community participation in programme design, but
NGOs do solicit community perspectives in the
monitoring process. When camps close down, the
programme may move with the population or close if
formal education has been reinstated. The role of the
community would become critical at this stage.

Overview of community engagement
Many of the forms of education protection cited earlier
can be implemented at any of the four different levels
within this typology – with some exceptions. Different
forms of support may be more or less realistic or
effective depending on the context, the nature of
attacks and community views of education.
Programme initiatives within a country may span the
full range of levels of engagement, depending on sitespecific realities. While community-initiated activities
may be better adapted to context and considered
more cost-effective than community-involved ones,
they are not feasible in all contexts. Furthermore,
some initially community-organized actions, such as
protests, may only achieve large-scale outcomes once
they gain support from NGOs, UN agencies or the
media.

Case studies of community prevention
and response action
Two country case studies, on the Philippines and
Afghanistan, are presented here to demonstrate the
range of activities in which communities can engage
within a given context. They also show how national

and international actors may support communities to
achieve protection for education.

The Philippines: Zones of Peace, and
monitoring and reporting
For the past thirty years, Mindanao, in the southern
Philippines, has experienced conflict between
government forces and a range of non-state actors.
Fighting between the Moro Islamic Liberation Front
(MILF) and the government alone has cost 60,000
lives and driven a million people from their homes.263
These conflicts have been accompanied by recurrent
attacks on education throughout Mindanao, including
burning and occupation of school buildings,
kidnapping of teachers,planting of explosive devices,
forced evacuations and physical attacks on school
buildings during fighting.In some cases, teachers
were targeted while performing election duties. The
MRM taskforce identified both state forces and armed
non-state groups as perpetrators.264

Initiatives engaging community groups in protection
of education
Learning Institutions as Zones of Peace
The Learning Institutions as Zones of Peace (LIZOP)
programme started in 2011, influenced by previous
national and international initiatives in zones of
peace, and established spaces that care for the
welfare of all children, prioritizing their rights to
protection and education.265 UNICEF is supporting the
expansion of this programme in conflict-affected
areas in Mindanao in collaboration with several NGOs,
the Department of Education and community groups.
The objective is to engage stakeholders – community
leaders, parents, teachers, state agencies and parties
to the conflict – to enable children in conflict-affected
areas to access safe education. Stakeholders in four
pilot communities participated in a process of developing a ‘declaration’ to recognize schools as ‘Zones of
Peace’.266 The project is now being rolled out in eight
additional communities.
Monitoring and reporting mechanisms
The Mindanao Peoples Caucus (MPC), formed in
January 2003, has trained 3,500 local volunteers,
called the Bantay Ceasefire group, to monitor and

