
Where numbers of attacks are cited in the study, they
are drawn either from a particular reliable source such
as the UN, in which case the source is cited, or they are
a tally of reported individual incidents compiled from
other secondary sources, including media reports and
reports by human rights organizations of individual
attacks, each of which is cited.
A summary of incidents for each country was prepared
and a tally produced for broad categories of incident,
target or victim. From this information, and in some
cases from complementary interviews, data were
triangulated, where possible, to avoid double
counting of incidents. A chronological list of reported
incidents for each country was created, along with
citations. All reports of incidents concerning the same
named victim, or same named target in the same
location within several days, were compared to
remove duplication and ensure reliable reporting.
Where figures for the same incident differed, the more
conservative count was used.
The study was extensively reviewed by experts in
human rights, international law, education-inemergencies and research methodology.

Challenges and limitations of data
collection and analysis
Monitoring and reporting of attacks on education are
improving but, without a global system for systematically gathering data, all figures on attacks should be
treated with caution. The figures in this study are
compiled from a wide range of sources of varying
quality – from UN monitoring to human rights and
media reports – each of which has its own limitations.
For example, data in the UN Secretary-General’s
reports on children and armed conflict include only
those incidents that the UN has been able to verify,
which are typically a small sub-set of the number of
violations actually taking place.7 The researchers for
Education under Attack have striven to present a
minimum count of the number of attacks. However, in
many places, attacks simply are not being reported
consistently or even at all; in others, the dearth of
official information necessitates a heavy reliance on
media and human rights sources. From those sources,

EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

we used only those that we judged to be reliable. The
research team, however, did not seek to verify each
case presented in this study. What the figures
presented in this study do indicate – with all their
limitations – is that the problem is serious and
widespread.
Among organizations collecting information on
attacks on education there is no commonly agreed
data set that would enable accurate analysis of trends
across countries. The lack of reliable baselines from
which to monitor trends over time, even within the
same country, makes it difficult to know with certainty
whether attacks in general, and specific types of
attack in particular, have increased or decreased over
time or have changed in nature or geographic distribution or whether observed changes are more likely to
be attributable to increases, decreases or inconsistencies in reporting.
The nature of the situations in which many attacks on
education occur – where armed conflicts are ongoing
or security constraints limit the availability of information – places heavy restrictions on how many
incidents can be verified or even reported. In many
locations, victims are afraid to report to international
NGOs on education-related or other types of incident
because they are scared of retribution if they are
identified. For instance, in Gaza, many human rights
groups are reluctant to report on child recruitment by
Palestinian armed groups for fear of reprisals.8 In
many parts of Afghanistan, it is too dangerous for
community elders to visit the offices of NGOs to
provide information lest they be tracked back to their
villages by anti-government groups. And the local staff
of those NGOs may themselves be reluctant to report
what information they do receive for fear of reprisals.
For these reasons, the picture presented by the study
is inevitably incomplete.
In some locations, there is limited access to mobile
phone networks, telephone landlines, faxes or email
to report information, along with a lack of information
management systems in which to store it and compare
sources. For example, the Nigerian military banned
the use of satellite phones in north-east Nigeria
because, they claimed, the group Boko Haram had
used satellite phones to plan attacks on schools.9

Rigorous collection and verification of data are
similarly complicated in some contexts where governments tightly control the flow of information and may
themselves be perpetrators of attacks. Often, in these
situations, there are very few sources of information
and the few organizations that may be monitoring
attacks may sympathize with the opposition group
being targeted by the government and therefore may
be biased in their reporting. Even where governments
are not responsible for committing attacks and may be
taking measures to prevent them, there may be
political sensitivities that make them reluctant to
publicly share data about attacks.
For some types of attack, there appear to be
systematic gaps in information. For example, data
collected on child recruitment and sexual violence do
not always specify the location in which these violations occur; consequently, it is more difficult, in many
cases, to determine whether there may be a pattern of
these kinds of incidents occurring in schools or along
school routes. In cases where teachers, academics or
other personnel are killed, wounded or arrested, information is often missing that would help to distinguish
whether or not they were targeted because of their
professional status or the exercise of their profession,
or for unrelated reasons that fall outside the scope of
this study. The same is true of students, particularly in
higher education. When figures are provided for the
number of schools damaged or destroyed, typically
there is no information on how many of these were
targeted and how many were incidents of collateral
damage. In this study, it is specified when it is
unknown whether attacks are targeted and those
incidents are not counted in any aggregate figures of
attacks. As a result, the aggregate figures are likely to
be undercounts.
The difficulty of cross-checking incidents across
different sources, with the exception of major
incidents that have drawn considerable national or
international attention, is also a limitation of the
study’s data collection and analysis. Even where
electronic information management systems are
being used to assist verification and are able to draw
on data from a number of systems, as they are in
Palestine, it may not be possible to match up data

