
Iraq: Children look at the hole made by a mortar round on a school roof in 2007.© Adil Al-Khazali/SIPA




Paul Colley, a London-based analyst, said: “By removing these groups the insurgents are aiming to eliminate all support for a democratic society and hope that by targeting academics, Iraq will become theocratic like the Islamic Republic of Iran.”48Muhammad al-Rubai, adviser to the Iraqi president on scientiﬁ c affairs, talking to the BBC,49 said assassinations had hit nearly every academic discipline and every university in Iraq. The universities have become a brutal battleground where abduction and murder of academics are a common event, he said. The competing motives can be sectarian, to seek revenge for losing inﬂ uence with the fall of Saddam Hussein or to “cleanse” universities of his collaborators. A report by Iraq Democracy Watch says: “We are faced with an organised, systematic operation driven by ideological, sectarian, and political motives.”50 Academic posts, such as university presidents, deans and chairs, as well as scholarships, are distributed on the basis of sectarian regional and gender quotas, where the percentage of women is almost non-existent and ministries have become party ﬁ efdoms, Iraq Democracy Watch says.Students are also targets for violent crime and sectarian killings, especially in Baghdad and Mosul. For instance in Baghdad, armed groups killed and injured a group of students in the Dura district and 12 university students were killed in the Latiﬁ a district. In Mosul, 12 students were killed off-campus last year, according to Iraq Democracy Watch.Koïchiro Matsuura said: “What possible future can Iraq have if its children and youth are denied their right to education? What possible future [is there] for a country whose intellectuals, researchers and educators have ﬂ ed because of terror and intimidation?”He urged the authorities, with whom UNESCO is working closely, to rebuild and revitalize an education system that was once the region’s ﬁ nest; to do their utmost to make schools and universities safe from the terrible violence; and to protect the lives of educational personnel and students.

48 www.irinnews.org, 27 February 2007, ‘Iraq: The Exodus of Academics has Lowered Educational standards’.49 BBC News, 5 November 2006, ‘Iraq’s Academics Targeted by Militias’.50 Iraq Democracy Watch, Baghdad, July 2006, Report on the Democratic Process in Iraq. (English translation). Iraq Democracy Watch is a monitoring body operating under the umbrella of the Iraq Foundation, a non-sectarian NGO set up by Iraqi expatriates.

