
PART III — COUNTRY PROFILeS

the night and began firing on students in their dormitories as they slept. While casualty figures varied,
reports suggested that as many as 50 students were
killed.1198 The gunmen also reportedly set fire to classrooms. Some 1,000 students were said to have left the
campus in the wake of the attack.1199
Several other incidents involving higher education
were reported. Students alleged that the police used
tear gas and fired live ammunition to break up a
protest against university transport prices at the
University of Uyo in June, killing a student; police,
however, denied this claim, saying that the students
had brought the body to them outside the campus,
which they were prohibited from entering. University
equipment was reportedly destroyed in anger after the
killing and 45 students were arrested, of whom 44
were charged with arson and murder.1200
In another incident, on 13 February, local police
detained between 10 and 12 lecturers at Rivers State
University of Science and Technology for holding a
meeting of the local chapter of the Academic Staff
Union of Universities on campus. They were held for
five hours before being released.1201

PAKISTAN
There were a reported 838 or more attacks on schools
in Pakistan during 2009-2012, more than in any other
country, leaving hundreds of schools destroyed.
Militants recruited children from schools and
madrassas, some to be suicide bombers. There were
also targeted killings of teachers and academics.

Context
The extremely high number of schools attacked in
Pakistan during 2009-2012 was the result of multiple
sources of tension but, in particular, the Pakistani
Taliban insurgency in the north-west.
In addition to the unresolved conflict with India over
Kashmir, a series of conflicts, internal disturbances
and sectarian tensions plagued Pakistan in the run-up
to and during the reporting period. Sunni and Shi’a
Muslims periodically launched attacks against one
another, frequently causing high numbers of
casualties. In Balochistan, armed nationalist groups
not only fought the federal government but also killed
non-Balochs. The Pakistani military fought repeated
offensives against Taliban militant strongholds in the
tribal areas bordering Afghanistan throughout the
period from 2009 to 2012.1202 They also regained
control of the Swat Valley and surrounding districts
from the Pakistani Taliban. Moreover, militants carried
out attacks well beyond their strongholds, infiltrating
all major cities. The southern port city of Karachi was
periodically brought to a standstill by political and
sectarian shootings and bomb attacks as well as
violence by armed criminal gangs.1203
In the two years preceding the reporting period,
several hundred schools were damaged or destroyed,
mostly burned down by militants, as they sought to
gain control of areas of the north-west, including in
Waziristan and Swat. When the Pakistani Taliban did
gain control of the Swat Valley, they first banned girls’
education and banned women from teaching, through
an edict in December 2008, and later amended their
edict to permit the education of girls, but only up to
grade 4.1204
Many children are unable to access education for
reasons that range from cost to community attitudes
towards education, attacks on school structures or the

