
PART II — THeMATIC eSSAYS

the MRM) reduced attacks because armed non-state
actors were aware of permanent observation.258

options for community engagement prior to implementing programmes.

Reports from DRC and Nepal indicate that communitybased NGOs involved in the MRM have been
threatened and intimidated.259 Close communication
with community groups and regular evaluation and
adaptation of monitoring mechanisms according to
community feedback are important for improving data
collection and reducing the risks to locally-appointed
MRM Monitors.260

1. Community-initiated: Community members
conceive, define, manage, implement and resource
these initiatives. Continuing community motivation is
essential to maintain action.

Overview of community action to prevent
and respond to attack
To ensure suitable response strategies, stakeholders
should conduct an in-depth analysis of the nature of
attacks on education, community awareness and
attitudes to education, and existing community
action. Context is very important. For example, in
places like Nepal, where Maoists used schools to gain
support, community negotiation and pressure from
civil society and international actors on government,
political leaders or armed groups may protect
education. In other circumstances, such as in Liberia
and Côte d’Ivoire, physical strengthening of premises
or use of guards may be more appropriate.

Levels of community engagement
As noted above, community actions to protect
education from attack can be mapped using a
framework of four interconnected - and in some
instances overlapping - levels of community
engagement: community-initiated, community-implemented, community-inspired and communityinvolved. Which level is most effective may depend on
the resourcing and design of the protection activities
and on-the-ground realities. Additionally, interventions may start off being ‘community-initiated’,
and then be emulated by external actors who
introduce them into other communities where they
become ‘community-involved’ actions. Furthermore,
within one community or programme it is possible that
several different actions are carried out with differing
levels of engagement. The typology may help
programme planners when considering various

