



Government security forces carried out their own variant on abduction: arresting teachers and students, forcing the disappearance of more than 150 and torturing more than 2,000 others.64 Children were being held for long periods in army barracks, police stations or adult prisons, without being subjected to any legal process.65 However, according to Human Rights Watch, the abduction of children did not stop with the signing of the comprehensive peace agreement in November 2006.A Human Rights Watch report66 in February 2007 suggested that the Maoists had failed to release the minors in their ranks and were still ‘frequently’ recruiting children, contrary to the terms of the peace agreement. Sometimes they ordered children to attend ‘educational sessions’ and then prohibited them from returning home. Colombia: Trade unionists in the ﬁ ring lineSamuel Morales never went anywhere without his pistol, not even school. Like other trade union leaders, the 37-year-old primary-school teacher was assigned bullet-proof vests, a bullet-proof vehicle and two bodyguards with 9mm pistols. Since not even this guaranteed his security, he carried legally registered arms into class. “I carry a Beretta automatic,” he told me four years ago, when he temporarily ﬂ ed to the United Kingdom for his own safety.67 Now he is in a Colombian prison and fears for his life.Morales is a member of the teachers’ association of Arauca, a region in north-east Colombia, and president of the regional branch of the national executive in the Central Trades Union Federation of Colombia. Over the years, he and his wife and four children have regularly had to change addresses. For many teachers in Colombia, forced displacement has become the only way of safeguarding themselves and their families.68 At one point, he escaped the country when assassins tried to kill him on the way back from a funeral. He was spared because he changed his route but a journalist member of a regional peace committee was killed instead. He eventually gave up teaching because he was afraid 

64 Figures supplied by INSEC, 2007, op cit.65 Amnesty International, 2005, ‘Nepal: Children Caught in the Conﬂ ict’.66 Human Rights Watch, February 2007, ‘Children in the ranks: The Maoists’s Use of Child Soldiers in Nepal’. 67 Brendan O’Malley, 25 July 2003, The Times Educational Supplement, ‘Union Leader Never Goes out Without Bullet-Proof Vest and Pistol’.68 Fecode, 7 January 2007, La lucha integral por los derechos humanos y Fecode.

