



The aim of some armed groups appears to be to divide society along ethnic and religious lines, claiming that the southern provinces represent a religious ‘conﬂ ict zone’ similar to the Palestinian Automous Territories or Afghanistan, that must be divided between Muslims and inﬁ dels.57 Schools and universities are seen as representing the Thai government and Buddhist-Thai culture. “Insurgents are terrorizing the civilian population by attacking teachers and schools, which they consider symbols of the Thai state,” said Brad Adams, Asia director at Human Rights Watch.Not only are they symbols of the state, but they are seen as inculcating the values of the state and imposing a national secular curriculum on an area which is 80 per cent Muslim. “Schools should be safe zones,’ says Sheldon Shaeffer, then Director of UNESCO’s Regional Bureau for Education in Bangkok, ’but they are highly visible targets and attacking them does more to grab the attention of the country or the world than attacking government ofﬁ ces.” As a result, teachers have been singled out for assassination. Since the start of the insurgency, at least 73 Muslim and Buddhist teachers or education workers have been killed, many of them shot on their way to or from school by pillion passenger assassins. Some have been shot in class - in one case insurgents donned school uniforms to get into the school - or at their lodgings, or during ambushes of security patrols trying to convoy students safely to their schools. Others have been held hostage with a view to exchanging them for the release of insurgent suspects from government custody. Many have died in explosions aimed at their transport, some have been attacked with knives and hammers as they left home. Bombs and remotely-controlled bombs have increasingly replaced ﬁ rebombings as the weapon of choice. For instance, on 28 September 2006 in Narathiwat, one person was killed and six injured when a 10 kg bomb exploded alongside a village road as a teacher protection unit of the 39th Task Force was making its morning rounds to escort teachers. The blast left a hole in the ground three metres deep and four metres wide. It overturned the soldiers’ armoured vehicle and sent shrapnel 30 metres into the air.Pradit Rasitanin, Director of the Education Ministry’s Inspector General’s Ofﬁ ce, said the number of casualties in education was continuing to rise despite tightened security measures at schools and improved protection for teachers. 

57 Human Rights Watch press release, 28 November 2006, ‘Thailand: Insurgent Attacks Shut Down Schools in South’.

