
witness told Human Rights Watch how students
scrambled to jump out of school windows on the
second and third storeys to escape Al-Shabaab
members when they came to their school.90
Isolated cases of sexual violence against students and
teachers perpetrated by armed forces or armed groups
at, or en route to or from, schools or universities were
also reported in DRC and Somalia. Two incidents in
CAR and India were also reported in 2012-2013.
Human Rights Watch research in Somalia found
evidence of girls being lined up at schools and taken
to be ‘wives’ of Al-Shabaab fighters. In one case, the
girls were selected at gunpoint; one who refused to be
taken was shot dead in front of her classmates.91 In
another incident, after 12 girls were taken by AlShabaab, the teacher reported that some 150 female
students dropped out of school. One of the 12 taken, a
16-year-old, was beheaded after refusing to marry a
fighter much older than her and her head was brought
back to be shown to the remaining girls at the school
as a warning.92
The number of incidents is likely to be under-reported,
especially for incidents en route to or from school.

Attacks on higher education
The study found attacks on higher education facilities,
students and academics and military use of universities were reported in 28 of the 30 profiled countries
in 2009-2012. The exceptions were CAR and Mali.
Attacks on higher education over the reporting period
included assassination, killing or injury of students
and academics, arbitrary arrest, torture, abduction,
kidnapping, imprisonment and the bombing of groups
of students, individual academics and higher
education facilities. There were also incidents of
universities being taken over or shut down by force.
These attacks on higher education were carried out
both by government armed forces, security forces or
police and by armed non-state groups, including
guerrillas, rebels, paramilitaries and militias. The
difference from school-level attacks is that, in higher
education, a greater proportion of attacks involve
arbitrary arrest or forms of persecution of named
individuals and there are far fewer attacks on

EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

buildings. In this regard, they are closer in type to
attacks on teacher trade unionists.
The countries with the highest number of reported
attacks on higher education included Sudan and
Yemen. The largest number of university students
killed was reported in Yemen, where 73 higher
education students were killed during the 2011
uprising and 139 were injured, 38 of whom were
permanently disabled as a result of their injury,
according to the Wafa Organization for Martyrs’
Families and Wounded Care.93 However, it is not
known how many of these killings and injuries
occurred on campus or in the vicinity of universities, or
because the victims were being targeted as students.
By contrast in Sudan, far fewer university students
were reportedly killed (15), but far more were injured
(479), many when police and security forces used
excessive force against students demonstrating on
campus over university policies.94
The largest number of university student arrests was
reported in Sudan – with more than a thousand

Rescue workers and family members gather to identify
the shrouded bodies of students killed during an
attack on the Yobe State College of Agriculture that left
some 50 students dead in Gujba, Yobe state, Nigeria,
29 September 2013.
© 2013 AP Photo

arrested, mostly in incidents directly related to
protests on education issues or carried out at
university dormitories or other education facilities.95
Where killings took place, in many cases they were
related to excessive use of force by security forces
against student demonstrators or were targeted
killings of individual academics and students. Some
of the most serious incidents involved raids carried
out on student dormitories or other forms of campus
residence in Côte d’Ivoire, Indonesia, Iran, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Sudan and Syria.96 For instance, in
September 2013, gunmen stormed a dormitory in the
middle of the night at a college in Yobe, Nigeria, and
opened fire, killing at least 50 students;97 and security
forces killed seven students, injured 49 and arrested

