



that explicitly prohibits by law the recruitment of children under 15 into the armed forces/groups or their direct participation in hostilities.92These are all positive steps that will aid attempts to tackle impunity regarding a signiﬁ cant range of forms of attack covered by this study, but only attacks relating to children. It is too early to judge how effective the International Criminal Court will be and the monitoring of grave offences by the Ofﬁ ce of the Special Representative has so far been heavily weighted in favour of child soldier issues, with only patchy reporting of attacks on schools. In addition, its remit does not extend to teachers or academics, universities, education trade unionists and education ofﬁ cials, which form part of the broader focus of this study.Greater effort by the UN system and the human rights movements to press for the application of rights instruments to cases involving these particular groups, might result in signiﬁ cant progress right across the range of attacks on education. Under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, the scope is there to investigate charges of attacks against teachers, academics, education trade unionists and education ofﬁ cials, since attacks against the civilian population or individuals not taking part in the conﬂ ict, and attacks against buildings dedicated to education, provided they are not military objectives, constitute war crimes. Where acts of murder, unlawful imprisonment and other severe deprivations of liberty are widespread and systematic and carried out under a publicly declared policy of targeting or killing civilians, for instance as perpetrated by the Taliban in Afghanistan, they are also crimes against humanity.93In addition, under international humanitarian law, occupying powers must guarantee schools protection from attack and ensure provision of free and compulsory education at primary level.94In 2003, when the late Katarina Tomasevski, former UN Special Rapporteur on the right to education, was asked if the UN Commission on Human Rights could prioritize the protection of teachers in their work, she said the Commission had failed to proﬁ le the right to education more assertively because it had not faced pressure from a forceful, well-coordinated NGO campaign. “That does not exist for the right to education. You will not see teachers’ trade unions coming to the Commission on Human Rights. They can’t seek protection here because the Commission does not even mention the rights of teachers. They will go to the ILO, which will protect them by special procedures for freedom of association.

92 UN Secretary General, 26 October 2006, ‘Children and Armed Conﬂ ict’.93 Amnesty International, 19 April 2007, ‘Afghanistan: All who are not friends, are enemies: Taleban abuses against civilians’.94 Susan Nicolai, Forced Migration Review Education Supplement, 2006, ‘Education and Chronic Crisis in Palestine’.

