



“If you were to scrutinize NGO-produced documentation to see what the NGOs have submitted to the Commission as a platform for what NGOs demand on the right to education, you ﬁ nd nothing.“What is needed here is the same growth of the human rights movement which we saw around freedom of expression or equal rights for women – good documents, sensible strategies and then well co-ordinated lobbying to get government delegations to move, but NGOs have to take the initiative. It is obviously not a job of diplomats to do human rights research, and to draw up alternative platforms.”95The question today is whether the UN agencies and NGOs can build on the progress made on the issue of recruitment of child soldiers and focus attention on securing more protection against abductions, killings, illegal detention and torture of students and teachers, education ofﬁ cials and trade unionists, and against attacks on schools and universities. There are existing human rights instruments dealing with attacks on education. It is a matter of visiting them and trying to get commentaries and resolutions based on them. Some concerted action is required on this issue.  Towards safe sanctuariesAny attempt to prioritize human rights protection for education workers and students comes up against two signiﬁ cant obstacles. One is the important argument that teachers’ lives should not be treated as more important than the lives of other workers. However, the Ofﬁ ce of the Special Representative of the Scretary-General for Children and Armed Conﬂ ict has already successfully put the case that schools and hospitals should be singled out for protection in human rights law because of their role in the care and protection of children. It would be an odd argument indeed if this applied only to the fabric of the building and not to the teachers and other workers who actually care for the children. Education is becoming accepted as part of the initial response to an emergency, whether it is a conﬂ ict or a disaster, because when the ﬁ ghting comes to an end parents’ greatest concern is about the future and what will happen to their children. During a conﬂ ict, all parties could have a vested interest in protecting schools for the same reason. The case for universities is put by the 1997 Recommendation concerning the Status of Higher Education Teaching Personnel, which considered that “the right 

95 Katarina Tomasevksi, interviewed in Human Rights Features, 5-12 April 2004.

