



going to school. The names of girls who had stopped going to school were broadcast, and listeners were told that girls who continued to attend classes would go to hell.Ahmed Ali, 52, a father of three girls, told IRIN: “We can’t risk sending our daughters to school. The Taliban do what they say. I have seen dead bodies – beheaded bodies, I don’t want to be made an example of”.141The ban on girls’ schools caused a public outcry. The managers of private schools appealed to the militants to reverse it in the interests of thousands of students and hundreds of female teachers, many of whom were the sole earners in their family. In late January, the Taliban softened their official stance, allowing girls to go to school up to fourth grade but maintaining their threat beyond it.142“I am too terrified to even send my daughter to a private school,” Qudsia Bibi, a parent of a 15-year-old girl, from a village near Matta, Swat, told IRIN. “I will try and teach her at home”.143On 6 February 2009, Pakistan attempted to defuse the Swat conflict by conceding to the Taliban’s demand to implement Sharia Law in Malakand, the region that includes Swat Valley, in return for a ceasefire. Part of the agreement included the concession that schools would be allowed to re-open.144 Swat soon resembled Afghanistan under Taliban rule before their defeat in 2001. In the towns, Talibs in black turbans and wielding sticks ensured Sharia Law was already being implemented. Black flags fluttered over buildings. Women were ordered to wear burkhas, forbidden from going to marketplaces or leaving the house unaccompanied by a man, and thrashed if inappropriately dressed; music was banned from shops; men faced reprisals if they let their wives go to work; and girls older than 13 were banned from going to school.145The most shocking case of Taliban justice was that of a teacher – a widow supporting three children – being labelled a prostitute and killed by militants for refusing to give 

141 Ibid.142 Delawar Jan, “400 Private Schools in Swat Shut Down Girls’ Classes,” The News, January 16, 2009; and Thaindian News, “Pakistan Posts Army at Swat Schools,” January 25, 2009, http://www.thaindian.com/newsportal/uncategorized/pakistan-posts-army-at-swat-schools_100146974.html.143 IRIN News, “Pakistan: Swat Militants Driving Girls Out of School.”144 Saeed Shah, “Pakistan Imposes Islamic Law in Taliban Stronghold,” The Guardian, February 15, 2009; and Jason Burke, “Taliban Agrees ‘Permanent Ceasefire’ in War-torn Valley,” The Observer, February 22, 2009.145 Stuart Ramsay, “Pakistani Region Where The Brutal Taleban Have Taken Control,” The Times, March 26, 2006.

