
Thailand

Egypt
Sudan

Central
African
Republic

Myanmar
The Philippines

EDUCATION UNDER ATTACK 2014

Students used
as human shields
In Somalia, armed militants used schools as bases to launch
attacks on opposing forces, making them targets for attack
while students and teachers were still inside. According to
Human Rights Watch in their 2012 report No place for children:
Child recruitment, forced marriage and attacks on schools in
Somalia, in some cases the militant Islamist group Al-Shabaab
locked frightened students and teachers in school, using them
as human shields while they launched artillery attacks from
behind the school or from school grounds against forces of the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). One primary school student
reported in 2010 that he was in class when Al-Shabaab fighters
started firing what seemed to be rockets from just behind the
school while classes were ongoing. ‘AMISOM/TFG started
responding…. The school was hit by a weapon that sounded
like a thunder when coming and then made a big explosion,’ he
told Human Rights Watch. Three children died in the attack and
six were injured.

Military use of education institutions
School and university facilities were used for military purposes
in 24 of the 30 countries profiled during 2009-2012:
Afghanistan, CAR, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, DRC, Egypt,
Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel/Palestine, Kenya, Libya,
Mali, Myanmar, Pakistan, the Philippines, Somalia, South
Sudan, Sudan, Syria, Thailand, Yemen and Zimbabwe.
The country with by far the most reported incidents was Syria,
where military use from the conflict spiked in 2011-2012.
Although it does not specify exact figures, the UN reported
numerous incidents of government forces using schools as
temporary bases or detention centres and there were allegations that the Free Syrian Army used schools in a number of
areas as bases and as places to store ammunition during this
period. Furthermore, the Syrian Network for Human Rights

alleged in mid-January 2013 that government
forces had used approximately 1,000 schools
as detention and torture centres and used
schools to house security and intelligence
personnel or as positions from which to shell
the surrounding area. It is assumed that nearly
all of these incidents took place before 2013,
although there is insufficient evidence to
confirm this.
Beyond Syria, in the other 14 countries with the
highest reported incidence of military use in
2009-2012 – Afghanistan, CAR, Colombia, Côte
d’Ivoire, DRC, India, Libya, Mali, Pakistan, the
Philippines, Somalia, South Sudan, Thailand
and Yemen – armed groups, armed forces,
police forces and international forces used a
total of 923 or more schools and universities for
military purposes in those four years. In Libya,
for example, armed groups reportedly used 221
schools during the 2011 uprising; and in eastern
and north-eastern India in 2010, government
forces reportedly used at least 129 schools as
barracks or bases in their conflict with Maoist
insurgents and other armed groups.
Across the countries where military use
occurred, schools and universities were used as
barracks to house soldiers or fighters or as
bases to mount security operations. They also
served as fighting positions, prisons or
detention centres, interrogation or torture sites
and places to store weapons. School buildings were
additionally used as places to indoctrinate, recruit and train
students in some places. In Mali, for instance, children as
young as 11 were reportedly trained by armed groups in
private, public and Koranic schools.
State armed forces and armed non-state groups jeopardize the
lives of students and teachers or other personnel when they
use schools and universities for military purposes without
evacuating them first, because the military presence could
well draw enemy fire. In many cases, military use leads to
learning being disrupted or halted altogether, as parents
withdraw their children, fearing for their safety, or the school is
closed. Even if the schools are empty, military use can damage
facilities or lead to those schools being destroyed in subsequent attacks.

